PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Hypotension and Shock Version: January 2024 Hypotension and Shock 
[ I ] Maintain age adjusted SBP. Consider:  PEDIATRIC: Epinephrine 0.1  - 1 mcg/kg/min IV/IO infusion. Max dose: 10 mcg/min.  Under 1 year old: Titrate to SBP > 70 mmHg Over 1 year old: Titrate to SBP > 90 mmHg (Add 1 mg of Epinephrine [1mg/mL] to 100 mL of 0.9% Sodium chloride = 10 mcg/mL) Note: Infusion via IV pump is preferred if available. Monitor closely for signs of extravasation. [ I ] P To maintain MAP > 65 mmHg until a vasopressor infusion is prepared, consider:  ADULT: Push dose Epinephrine 5-10 mcg IV/IO every 2-3 minutes  (Add 100 mcg Epinephrine (1mL of 0.1 mg/mL) to 9mL of 0.9% Normal Saline = 10 mcg / mL) P MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  MC  PEARLS • This protocol is not intended for the management of patients with hypotension due to major trauma. • * There are many potential causes of hypotension. Generally, the causes fall into one of four categories: cardiogenic, distributive, hypovolemic or obstructive. Alternatively, hypotension can be rapidly assessed as a: o Pump problem: Cardiac issues such as dysrhythmia, ischemia, or tamponade o Tank problem: Hypovolemia (intravascular) due to hemorrhage, vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration, sepsis or anaphylaxis o Pipe problem: Large vessel injury or obstruction such as aortic dissection or pulmonary embolism  • Hypotension is a late sign of shock in pediatric patients. Children with tachycardia should be assessed closely for signs of compensated shock and providers must maintain a high index of suspicion that they may progress into decompensated shock with little warning. • When administering fluids to an infant or child, use a three-way stopcock and syringe to pull/push the desired volume.  • ** Use caution when administering IV fluids to patients with known or suspect congestive heart failure or decreased ejection fraction. Large volumes of rapidly administered fluids may lead to pulmonary edema and respiratory distress. Administer smaller boluses (250 mL then reassess) and consider early administration of vasopressors to patients unlikely to tolerate large volumes of IV fluids.  • Administer vasopressors through the largest, most proximal IV site available (AC or higher preferable) or IO. Verify patency prior to initiating infusion and monitor closely for signs of extravasation.  • Use caution when considering positive pressure ventilation for patients with hypotension, particularly due to intravascular hypovolemia (reduced pre-load). Intubation and positive pressure ventilation may lead to a sudden drop in blood pressure or circulatory collapse / cardiac arrest.   

--- PAGE 115 ---