PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Drowning and Diving Injuries Version: January 2024 Drowning and Diving Injuries 
PEARLS • Caution: rewarming the extremities before the trunk may lead to vasodilation, resulting in a drop in blood pressure.  • Trauma very commonly occurs along with submersion / drowning. Maintain a high suspicion for blunt trauma, particularly involving the head and spine.  • Patients in cardiac arrest following cold-water submersion have been reported to survive neurologically intact even following prolonged resuscitation. Contact Medical Control for guidance regarding continued on-scene resuscitation vs transport to the closest emergency department.  • Handle patients with hypothermia gently – rough handling may precipitate arrythmias including lethal VF.  • Pulmonary edema may develop hours after a submersion event. Transport of all patients who have experienced nonfatal drowning for assessment and observation is encouraged.  • * Rapid ascent after breathing compressed air at depth may lead to barotrauma including injury to the lungs (pneumothorax). Evaluate and treat as you would any other trauma patient, beginning with a complete head-to-toe assessment.  • * Rapid ascent may also lead to the formation of gas bubbles in the soft tissues, causing pain (i.e. “the bends”). These bubbles may also form within the vasculature (arterial gas emboli) which can present as a variety of emergencies including seizure, stroke, MI or PE. Initial treatment is centered on identification, stabilization, and transport to an appropriate facility. 

--- PAGE 95 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Electrical Injuries Version: January 2024 Electrical Injuries 
I Consider endotracheal intubation vs immediate transport to the nearest emergency department if any signs of symptoms of airway injury develop:  • Singed facial or nasal hairs • Burns or soot on the face, nose, or mouth  • Hoarse voice or stridor • Carbonaceous sputum • Difficulty breathing / respiratory distress • Hypoxia • Tachypnea  Follow Endotracheal Intubation procedure if proceeding with intubation. Note: Intubation of spontaneously breathing patients without rapid sequence induction (RSI) is generally not recommended. RSI is not addressed in regional protocols – refer to agency specific protocols for guidance. Note: Intubation of children under 12 years old is a Paramedic “red dot” skill only. I 
MC Contact Medical Control if most appropriate transport destination is unclear: Cardiac arrest, impending arrest, or airway compromise à Closest emergency department  Major or multisystem trauma à Trauma Center (Level I or II) None of the above AND any of the following à Consider transport to a Burn Center  • Any full thickness burns • Partial thickness burns > 10 % TBSA • Circumferential burns • Electrical or chemical burns • Inhalation injuries  Burns to the face, eyes, ears, hands, feet, genitalia, perineum or skin overlying major joints MC        

--- PAGE 96 ---