--- PAGE 1 ---
E"ective: 05/01/2024  
Approved on March11, 2024 by the PEMS Medical Advisory Committee 
Peninsulas EMS Council, Inc.  
6876 Main Street 
Gloucester, VA 23061  
Phone: (804) 693-6234 Fax: (804) 693-6277 
Email: pems@vaems.org 
www.peninsulas.vaems.org  
Regional Patient Ca 
Protocols, Policies, and Procedures  

--- PAGE 2 ---
                         This Page Intentionally Left Blank 

--- PAGE 3 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Acknowledgements Version: March 2024  Acknowledgements 
We thank the following individuals and agencies for their contributions to this document:  Peninsula EMS Council Partners:  Platinum Partners   Gold Partners   Silver Partners    Bronze Partners    


--- PAGE 4 ---
 
        This Page Intentionally Left Blank 

--- PAGE 5 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Introduction Version: March 2024 Introduction 
PROTOCOLS POLICIES AND PROCEDURES COMMITTEE MISSON STATEMENT  The intent is to provide current, well-researched, and accepted standards with the ultimate goal of minimizing the morbidity and mortality of our patients, and to provide guidelines for the treatment of specific emergency conditions in the pre-hospital setting. PROTOCOLS, POLICIES AND PROCEDURES COMMITTEE GOALS  1. To establish minimum standards for appropriate patient care.  2. To ensure a structure of accountability for operational medical directors, physician course directors, facilities, agencies, and providers.  3. To establish the knowledge base for certification and recertification in the region.  AUTHORITY  The Peninsulas EMS Council regional medical protocols are developed by consensus of participating agencies under Virginia Emergency Medical Services Regulations 12VAC5- 31 (Performance Standards). Each agency OMD must approve the protocols and has the authority to limit or expand implementation of protocols within their agency. Virginia Emergency Medical Services Regulations 12VAC5-31 (Responsibilities of Operational Medical Directors) grants authority to establish and enforce protocols, policies and procedures. All prehospital medical care is carried out with the express written authority of the operational medical directors and under their supervision. Virginia Emergency Medical Services Regulations 12VAC5-31 (Operational Medical Director Authorization to Practice) states “EMS personnel may only provide emergency medical care while acting under authority of the operational medical director for the EMS agency with which they are affiliated and within the scope of the EMS agency license”.  INTRODUCTION The following protocols were developed as a collective effort by a group of dedicated and knowledgeable EMS providers, EMS educators, and operational medical directors of the EMS agencies of Peninsulas EMS Council (PEMS). These individuals, who recognized a need for a "Standard of Excellence," volunteered for the PEMS Protocols, Policies, and Procedures (PPP) Committee, a sub-committee of the PEMS Medical Advisors Committee (MAC). This committee researched and reviewed the following patient care guidelines.   

--- PAGE 6 ---
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures  
Introduction  
Version: March 2024  Introduction  
This collaborative effort provides a dynamic document that is based on national and state standards of 
care that include but are not limited to:  
•Virginia Department of  Health
•American Heart Association - Advanced Cardiac Life Support and Pediatric Advanced Life  Support
•American Academy of Pediatrics - Pediatric Education for Prehospital Professionals American College of
Surgeons Committee on Trauma - Advanced Trauma Life  Support
•National Association of Emergency Medical  Technicians
These protocols are reviewed continuously and updates provided to the MAC for deliberation and 
approval as national, state, and regional standards change and are supported by scientific research and 
literature.  
The primary purpose of these protocols is to establish a foundation and a minimum standard of care for the 
pre- hospital care delivered in our region. This is best served by active EMS operational medical directors 
and dedicated EMS providers supported by continued education, review, quality improvement and 
continuous pursuit of excellence.  
Although no document can specifically address every possible variation of injury or disease, this manual provides a foundation for the care of the patients we serve. The education, experience, and judgment of the 
pre-hospital provider should be recognized as the paramount part of sound clinical decision -making 
processes regarding pre-  hospital care. The complexity of emergency medicine and the pre -hospital setting 
requires a team approach using every appropriate, accepted and available resource to provide o ptimal 
patient care. In many cases, that resource is on -line medical control for consultation, advice, guidance, and 
authorization or modification of treatment not specifically addressed in this manual. The specific handling of 
these situations is determin ed by the operational medical director responsible for that particular EMS 
agency and the EMS providers they oversee, and for that reason is intentionally not addressed in this 
manual.  
The departmental policies are the responsibility of each agency and operational medical director. All 
are encouraged to support the premise of regional care and the collective effort on which these 
guidelines were founded.  
The provision of emergency care does not, and should not, occur in isolation. It requires many individuals 
and organizations working together towards a common goal - optimizing our patients’ clinical outcomes. 
The efforts provided by the PPP Committee whil e working in conjunction with the MAC will provide a basis 
for the development of a regional EMS approach to the "Standard of Excellence".  

--- PAGE 7 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures How to Read the Protocols Version: March 2024 How to Read the Protocols 
LEVELS OF CERTIFICATION (KEY) EMR Emergency Medical Responder EMT Emergency Medical Technician A Advanced Emergency Medical Technician I Intermediate P Paramedic [ ] Medical Control  !  Caution These items in the provider’s scope of practice have the following special requirements: 1. Documentation of EMS agency (post-affiliation) training, to the specific skills and medications, must be present and maintained in the providers personnel file, and 2. EMS agency Operational Medical Director must provide specific written authorization, to include and/or limit, these specific skills and medications, in the provider’s scope of practice. Written authorization must be kept and maintained in the provider’s personnel file.              

--- PAGE 8 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures How to Read the Protocols Version: March 2024 How to Read the Protocols 
 The following are your new protocols. These have been formatted in a way that is different from what you have seen in the Peninsulas EMS (PEMS) Council previously. The new layout accomplishes several things including minimizing space, thus saving paper, as well as proactively mirroring a proposed statewide protocol format. Though different, with a brief explanation you will find these protocols to be straightforward and easy to use.  The protocols are color-coded in addition to having the level of care beside each possible treatment. The levels of care are reflective of the Office of EMS’ (OEMS) changes to the titles of certification. First Responders will from here on be known as Emergency Medical Responders (EMR), the former EMT-Basic is now the EMT, the EMT-Enhanced is now the Advanced EMT (A), EMT-Intermediate will now be Intermediate (I) and EMT- Paramedic will now be Paramedic (P). As in the previous revisions, brackets [ ] indicate a need for medical control to be contacted at the bracketed level of care (e.g. Intermediate intervention requiring medical control is shown as [ I ]).  The major change in this format is that rather than listing each level of care which can perform an action, simply the most basic certification which can perform an action is listed. For example, if an action shows the code EMR beside it, anyone of the Emergency Medical Responder, EMT, Advanced EMT, Intermediate, or Paramedic levels of care can perform the task whereas a step showing [A] beside it means EMR and EMT providers may not perform the action, Advanced EMTs must call for orders and Intermediate or Paramedic providers may perform it as a standing order. Any action with the code MC beside it means that any level of care must call for orders before performing this action.  ALS and BLS Protocols for adults and pediatrics have been combined into one set of tasks. Also in this version of the protocols is the PEARLS section of each protocol. This section provides important considerations and points for taking your patient care from mediocre to exceptional! Cautions to be considered for each step are listed next to an alarm bell.   

--- PAGE 9 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Administrative Policies Table of Contents Version: March 2024  Administrative Policies Table of Contents 
 Title .................................................................................................................................................. Effective Date       Abuse Recognition & Mandated Reporting .................................................................................................... 12/2012       ALS Release to BLS .......................................................................................................................................... 12/2012          Communications ............................................................................................................................................. 04/2021       Death & Criteria for Withholding Resuscitation ............................................................................................. 07/2022       Helicopter EMS (HEMS) .................................................................................................................................. 12/2012       Infant Abandonment ...................................................................................................................................... 03/2023       Patient Refusal ................................................................................................................................................ 03/2022       Patient Restraint ............................................................................................................................................. 12/2012       Safe Transport of Pediatric Patients ............................................................................................................... 12/2012       STEMI Field Triage .......................................................................................................................................... 04/2021       Stroke Field Triage .......................................................................................................................................... 04/2024       Transportation & Destination Determination ................................................................................................ 03/2022       Behavioral Health Transportation Decision ………………………………………………………………………………………………..03/2024       Trauma Field Triage ........................................................................................................................................ 04/2021         

--- PAGE 10 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 11 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures  Version: March 2024  Abuse Recognition & Mandatory Reporting  Abuse Recognition & Mandatory Reporting 
PURPOSE To identify and comply with mandatory reporting requirements of the Commonwealth of Virginia to the degree they impose requirements on EMS providers to report specific situations or circumstances. Guidelines • Child abuse and/or neglect 800-552-7096 § 63.2-1509 • Elder abuse/neglect/exploitation 888-83-ADULT (888-832-3858) §63.2-1606(A) • Hunting Accidents 804-367-1258 or 804-367-2251 §29.1-100 & §29.1-530.4  CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT Virginia EMS providers are identified as mandated reporters. Mandated reporters must report the situation immediately to the local department of social services in the locality where the child resides or where the abuse is believed to have occurred or make reports to the 24-hour, toll-free Virginia Department of Social Services (VDSS) Child Protective Services (CPS) hotline. Failure to do so shall lead to monetary penalties. If transporting the child in question it is also acceptable to report to the attending physician at the hospital. Provide appropriate documentation on the PCR “made notification to Dr.  .” For more details, see §63.2-1509. • Physical abuse - the use of physical force that may result in bodily injury, physical pain, or impairment • Neglect - the refusal or failure to fulfill any part of a person's obligations or duties to a child such as abusing dependence o Neglect may also include failure of a person who has fiscal responsibilities to provide care for a child (e.g., pay for necessary home care services. o The failure on the part of an in-home service provider to provide necessary care • Sexual abuse - non-consensual sexual contact of any kind; sexual contact with any person incapable of giving consent is also considered sexual abuse • Sexual exploitation - can involve the following: possession, manufacture and distribution of child pornography, online enticement of children for sexual acts, child prostitution, child sex tourism, and child sexual molestation • Emotional/mental injury - the infliction of anguish, pain, or distress through verbal or nonverbal acts such as ridiculing values or spiritual beliefs, threats, intimidation, guilt and blame • Abandonment - the desertion of a minor child by an individual who has assumed responsibility for providing care for the child, or by a person with physical custody of the child Assessment Guidelines • Assess for and document psychological characteristics of abuse, including excessive passivity, compliant or fearful behavior, excessive aggression, violent tendencies, excessive crying, fussy behavior, hyperactivity, or other behavioral disorders • Assess for and document physical signs of abuse, including any injuries inconsistent with the reported mechanism of injury, or do to non-age-appropriate activities • Assess for and document symptoms or signs of neglect, including inappropriate level of clothing for weather, inadequate hygiene, absence of attentive caregivers, or indications of malnutrition  

--- PAGE 12 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures  Version: March 2024  Abuse Recognition & Mandatory Reporting  Abuse Recognition & Mandatory Reporting 
 ELDER ABUSE OR NEGLECT Virginia EMS providers are identified as mandated reporters. §63.2-1606(A) • Mandated reporters must report the following to Adult Protective Services and law enforcement: o Physical abuse – the use of physical force that may result in bodily injury, physical pain, or impairment o Sexual abuse - non-consensual sexual contact of any kind. Sexual contact with any person incapable of giving consent is also considered sexual abuse o Emotional or psychological abuse - the infliction of anguish, pain, or distress through verbal or nonverbal acts such as ridiculing values or spiritual beliefs, threats, intimidation, guilt and blame o Neglect - the refusal or failure to fulfill any part of a person's obligations or duties to an elder such as abusing dependence § Neglect may also include failure of a person who has fiscal responsibilities to provide care for an elder (e.g., pay for necessary home care services) § The failure on the part of an in-home service provider to provide necessary care o Abandonment - the desertion of an elderly person by an individual who has assumed responsibility for providing care for an elder, or by a person with physical custody of an elder o Financial or material exploitation - the illegal or improper use of an elder's funds, property, or assets o Self-neglect - the behavior of an elderly person that threatens his/her own health or safety. Self-neglect generally manifests itself in an older person as a refusal or failure to provide himself/herself with adequate food, water, clothing, shelter, personal hygiene, medication (when indicated), and safety precautions • Suspected sexual abuse, death, serious bodily injury or disease believed to be the result of abuse or neglect; applies to an adult 60 years of age or older or an adult 18 years of age or older who is incapacitated and is being abused, neglected or exploited o Mandated reporters must report the situation immediately to the local department of social services in the locality where the adult resides or where the abuse is believed to have occurred. o Report to the 24-hour, toll-free VDSS APS hotline. • Any other criminal activity involving abuse or neglect that places the adult in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury o Mandated reporters must report to the appropriate medical examiner and law enforcement agency when there is reason to suspect that a vulnerable adult died as a result of abuse or neglect. Assessment Guidelines • Assess for and document psychological characteristics of abuse, including excessive passivity, compliant or fearful behavior, excessive aggression, violent tendencies, excessive crying, fussy behavior, hyperactivity, or other behavioral disorders • Assess for and document physical signs of abuse, including any injuries inconsistent with the reported mechanism of injury • Assess for and document symptoms or signs of neglect, including inappropriate level of clothing for weather, inadequate hygiene, absence of attentative caregivers, or indications of malnutrition  

--- PAGE 13 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures  Version: March 2024  Abuse Recognition & Mandatory Reporting  Abuse Recognition & Mandatory Reporting 
MANDATED REPORTING OF HUNTING ACCIDENTS §29.1-530.4 requires “that any emergency medical service provider that receives a report [that a person engaged in hunting] as defined in §29.1-100 has suffered serious bodily injury or death, shall immediately give notice of the incident to the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries.” • EMS providers are required to report the event to the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries within five days of the incident • It is a Class 4 misdemeanor to fail to report this information • Call the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries 24-hour law enforcement dispatch center.                   

--- PAGE 14 ---
 
          This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 15 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures ALS Release to BLS Version: March 2024 ALS Release to BLS 
PURPOSE To permit the transfer of patients not requiring Advanced Life Support (ALS) care to Basic Life Support providers when ALS is not medically necessary.  POLICY This policy applies to all patients where patient contact has been made and the ALS provider desires to release the patient to a BLS provider. An ALS provider may transfer care of a patient to a BLS provider according this the following procedure:  PROCEDURE • A complete, pertinent patient history and physical assessment, including a full set of vital signs, must be completed. • If it is deemed that the patient does not require ALS, the Basic Life Support (BLS) provider can operate as the Attendant in Charge (AIC) when the following criteria are met: o ALS care is not currently medically necessary and will likely not in the near future be necessary (to include pain management) o The BLS provider is willing to accept responsibility for the patient o BLS provider is capable of providing a level of care that meets the assessed and documented needs of the patient’s condition • The BLS provider must complete a Patient Care Report. • The ALS provider must contact Medical Control when there is a concern of the appropriateness of the release of patient care to a BLS provider. • The ALS provider must complete documentation in, or as an addendum to, the Patient Care Report. Documentation will include physical findings, transfer of care, and physician consultation on the Patient Care Report when necessary. • Any ALS Release to BLS must be reviewed by the agency Quality Assurance/Quality Improvement process. • A determination of inappropriate release by the Quality Assurance/Quality Improvement review should be reported, quarterly, to the PEMS PI Committee.        

--- PAGE 16 ---
 
          This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 17 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Communications Version: March 2024 Communications 
PURPOSE To effectively communicate with Medical Control  POLICY The HEAR (Hospital Emergency Administrative Radio) system is used to notify hospitals of basic and advanced life support patients NOT requiring on-line physician intervention. The HEAR system may be used for physician consultation only when COR (Consultation, Order, Refusal) access is not available. HEAR system reporting should be brief; a detailed patient report should be given to the receiving hospital staff upon arrival. The COR system shall be used for direct contact with Medical Control in any situation where physician consultation is appropriate, and shall be used to provide the patient’s name and date of birth for potential Stroke, Trauma or STEMI alerts. Reports should follow the recommended regional format. When Medical Control authorization is needed for medication administration or procedures, as required by PEMS Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures, authorization may only be given by a licensed Physician, Physician Assistant (PA), or Nurse Practitioner (NP). Proper uses of the HEAR or COR include but are not limited to:  • providing the pre-arrival report. • any unstable/unsecured airway patient needing transport to the closest hospital. • patients requiring activation of specialized care teams (i.e. Rape, Burn, STEMI). • consultation regarding patient refusal. • authorization for ALS release to BLS. • obtaining medical control consultation. PROCEDURE Mass-casualty or disaster incidents:  Once communication has been established with the coordinating emergency department, a request to follow Regional Medical Protocols as written can be granted by Medical Control. This allows providers to provide patient care approved for their level of certification without having to contact Medical Control again during the MCI. During an MCI, routine ambulance-to-emergency department communications are suspended. The transport group supervisor/unit leader will communicate patient information directly to the coordinating emergency department. The coordinating emergency department will relay the information to the receiving emergency departments. For further information, see the Hampton Roads Mass Casualty Incident Response Guide   

--- PAGE 18 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Communications Version: March 2024 Communications 
THE PRE-ARRIVAL REPORT SHOULD INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING: • Provider agency/unit/technician ID/estimated time of arrival (ETA) • Patient age, gender, and chief complaint • History of present illness or injury • Pertinent medical history • Significant physical findings • Vital signs • Treatment  COMMUNICATIONS FAILURE CRITERIA Provider is unable to make contact with medical control after two attempts by each of two different methods (i.e. twice via radio and twice via cell phone for a total of four attempts).  PROTOCOL Follow the most appropriate protocol from your PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures. Proceed with treatments listed in the protocol based on the clinical situation, and as appropriate for your level of certification. All orders within your scope of practice are considered standing orders in this situation. Carefully document events including:  • time of the call. • nature and location of the communication problem. • clinical status of the patient. • protocol(s) used. • Complete and submit a copy of the Medical Control Incident Form. The Medical Incident Form and the PCR must be provided to your Operational Medical Director (OMD) within 48 hours of the occurrence. The OMD may require additional information and/or a personal meeting with the provider(s) to review the incident.  The OMD may suspend use of this protocol in the event of inappropriate actions, compliance failures, or abuse of the procedure. The OMD will notify the appropriate agency's administration regarding problem incidents as soon as possible  The OMD may also review such incidents with the Medical Advisors Committee in order to evaluate system performance and improvement needs.   

--- PAGE 19 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Communications Version: March 2024 Communications 
REGIONAL RESOURCES & TELEPHONE NUMBERS  Air Transport Nightingale Air Ambulance (Norfolk, VA)   (800) 572-4354  (757) 388-5597 Med-Flight Air Ambulance (Richmond, VA)      (800) 468-8892 LifeEvac VCU Health Air Ambulance (Richmond, VA)  (877) 902-7779  (804) 652-0171 LifeEvac VCU Health (West Point, VA)   (877) 902-7779  (804) 785-2463 Air-Care Air Ambulance (Fredericksburg, VA & Fairfax, VA) (800) 258-8181  (703) 698-2980 UVA Pegasus Air Ambulance (Charlottesville, VA)  (800) 552-1826  (434) 978-4426  COR Sentara Careplex      (757) 224-4188 Children’s Hospital of King’s Daughters   (757) 668-8000 Riverside Regional      (757) 594-2057 Sentara Williamsburg     (757) 984-7185 Mary Immaculate      (757) 875-5202 Riverside Walter Reed     (804) 693-4600 Riverside Doctors      (757) 903-2138 Rappahannock General     (804) 259-3015 VCU Children’s Hospital     (804) 828-3989 VCU Tappahannock      (804) 442-6297  Critical Incident Stress Management PEMS CISM Team      (757) 220-4356   Haz-Mat Virginia Department of Emergency Management (VDEM) (804) 674-2400 Regional Hazardous Materials Officer  Metropolitan Medical Resposne System (MMRS) York County Dispatcher     (757) 890-3621         (757) 890-3622  Poison Control      (800) 222-1222  Terrorism        VA State Police Terrorism Hotline    (866) 488-8554         

--- PAGE 20 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Communications Version: March 2024 Communications 
Water & Technical Rescue Divers Alert Network   Emergencies: (919) 684-8111       Information: (919) 684-2948  Sentara Leigh Hyperbaric Medicine    (757) 466-2325  U.S. Coast Guard – Small Boat Requests   (757) 483-8567 Group Hampton Roads Command Center   U.S. Coast Guard – Helicopter Requests   (757) 398-6231 Fifth District & Atlantic Area Command Center   Peninsula Regional Technical Rescue Team   (757) 890-3621     (York Dispatcher)      (757) 890-3622  Tidewater Regional Technical Rescue Team   (757) 427-5033     (Virginia Beach Dispatcher)    (757) 427-5943 

--- PAGE 21 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Death & Criteria for Withholding Resuscitation Version: March 2024 Death & Criteria for Withholding Resuscitation 
TERMINATION CRITERIA When cardiac arrest is refractory to appropriate and available prehospital interventions based on provider certification level, Medical Control may direct EMS providers to cease resuscitation efforts.  Termination Protocol EMT Provide full basic life support care including AED, pulse ox, EtCO2, and supraglottic airway. EMT  I Provide full advanced life support level care. This includes defibrillation (as indicated), advanced airway, IV/IO access, and medication administration in accordance with ACLS.  I  MC Contact Medical Control Provide a thorough report of patient history, condition, and treatment. If resuscitation efforts are terminated at the scene, document time and physician name on the PCR.  MC EMT Follow agency protocols/policies concerning notification of law enforcement and/or medical examiner. Remain on scene until proper authorities arrive. EMT EMT Be attentive to the emotional needs of any family members or bystanders present. EMT  PEARLS • Termination of resuscitation efforts is a Medical Control decision only. • Resuscitation efforts and transport to the emergency department are indicated for any patient having suspected hypothermia. • Consider patient's previously diagnosed medical condition.  WITHHOLDING RESUSCITATION CRITERIA In accordance with Commonwealth of Virginia law, full resuscitation measures shall be undertaken for all victims of cardiopulmonary arrest except in the presence of one or more of the indications of death:  • The presence of one of the following: o An actual valid Virginia DDNR form o An actual valid DDNR from any State o A copy of a valid Virginia DDNR form (a digital copy is permitted) o A copy of a valid DDNR form from any State (a digital copy is permitted) o A Virginia approved DDNR ALERT bracelet or necklace o For reference, see the Code of Virginia §54.1-2987.1, § 54.1-2982 • Decapitation or other obvious mortal injury • Rigor mortis • Dependent lividity • Decomposition During mass-casualty incidents, resources must be directed toward viable patients  

--- PAGE 22 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Death & Criteria for Withholding Resuscitation Version: March 2024 Death & Criteria for Withholding Resuscitation 
 Withholding Protocol   MC When treating cardiac arrest victims who possess a "living will" or an advanced directive (other than a valid DDNR order/POST), full resuscitative efforts should be initiated and Medical Control consulted as quickly as possible regarding the continuation or termination of treatment. Be prepared to review the reason(s) why resuscitation efforts may not be indicated (i.e. terminal illness).   MC   EMT Providers shall honor any form issued or approved by the VA Department of Health to include: Alternate DDNR Jewelry” and “other” DNR Orders including out of state DNR forms; this document must accompany the patient to the hospital. An original or a copy of a DDNR form must be in a patient’s chart when responding to a call from a nursing home or hospice. A photocopy is acceptable.   EMT   EMT Providers shall honor a physician order when a patient is in a licensed health care facility. The form must include the patient’s full legal name, physician’s signature, and date issued, and can be a photocopy. A patient who is travelling outside his home or between healthcare facilities should have an original or photocopy DDNR or other DNR or alternate jewelry accompanying him. 12 VAC 5-6640   EMT  EMT EMS providers shall honor a direct verbal order from a physician who is present and in the attendance of the patient at the time of death. Record physician’s name and time of order on PCR.  EMT EMT If resuscitation efforts were discontinued at the scene per Medical Control, document the time and physician’s name on the PCR form. EMT EMT Document physical findings and patient history on the PCR form. EMT  EMT If the patient is DOA or resuscitation efforts were ended before transport from the scene, follow department policies/protocols concerning the notification of law enforcement and/or medical examiner.  EMT EMT Be attentive to the emotional needs of family members and bystanders. EMT  PEARLS  • For POST (Physician Orders for Scope of Treatment) forms, Section A qualifies as a DDNR • If you have any questions regarding the orders, ask Medical Control • Providers are reminded they are still not to exceed their Scope of Practice          

--- PAGE 23 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Helicopter EMS (HEMS) Version: March 2024 Helicopter EMS (HEMS) 
INDICATIONS • Patients meeting specialty care criteria including but not limited to: o STEMI o Stroke o Trauma o Burns o Critical Pediatrics o Ventricular Assist Device (LVAD/BiVAD/VAD as directed per VAD Coordinator or Medical Control) • The air ambulance service can provide needed medical capability at the scene. • Difficult-access situations: o Wilderness rescue o Ambulance egress or access impeded at the scene by road conditions, weather, or traffic POLICY Technicians can request HEMS without authorization by medical control. PROCEDURE 1. Establish a safe and logistically feasible landing zone. 2. Request air ambulance standby/response according to department procedure. 3. Establish number of patients, primary injuries/medical condition, and approximate patient weight(s). Forward this information to the responding air medical service. 4. Trauma patients should be fully immobilized. IV/IO access should be established as time allows. 5. On scene one individual should be responsible for providing the patient report(s) to the flight crew upon arrival. 6. Ensure PCR is provided to receiving facility as per 12 VAC 5-31   

--- PAGE 24 ---
 
        This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 25 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Infant Abandonment Version: March 2024 Infant Abandonment 
PURPOSE To identify the circumstances under which a parent may surrender an infant under the Virginia Safe Haven Law. Reference §18.2-371, §18.2-371.1, §40.1-103 POLICY Providers in the PEMS region will follow all laws. PROCEDURE • A parent may leave an infant (within the first 30 days of the child’s life) at a hospital that provides 24-hour emergency services or to an attended rescue squad that employs emergency medical services personnel. • The child must have been delivered in a manner reasonably calculated to ensure the child’s safety. • Providers receiving an infant under these circumstances should contact Child Protective Services or local law enforcement resources and, if indicated, transport to an appropriate facility. IMMUNITY Personnel of a hospital or rescue squad receiving a child under the circumstances previously described shall be immune from civil liability or criminal prosecution for injury or other damage to the child unless such injury or other damage is the result of gross negligence or willful misconduct by such personnel. Reference § 8.01-226.5:2 

--- PAGE 26 ---
 
        This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 27 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Patient Refusal of Treatment/Transport Version: March 2024 Patient Refusal of Treatment/Transport 
CRITERIA • Any patient or surrogate decision maker refusing or declining treatment of a condition for which treatment would be otherwise indicated and/or transport via ambulance to an appropriate receiving facility PROTOCOL  EMT Conduct a thorough assessment of the patient including vital signs and physical exam in accordance with relevant patient care protocols.  EMT   EMT Assess right to refuse/consent: • Patient must be at least 14 years of age to consent to or refuse care / transport. • Patient must not be subject to a court decree of incapacity or incompetence pertaining to healthcare decisions to refuse otherwise indicated care/transport.   EMT        EMT  Assess clinical decision-making capacity: • Ensure the patient is fully oriented (person, place, time, events) • Ensure the patient does not pose a foreseeable risk of harm to self or others • Ensure the patient understands the current clinical situation and proposed plan for treatment and/or transport, as well as any reasonable alternatives. • Ensure the patient understands the potential risks and benefits of accepting or refusing the proposed plan and any reasonable alternatives. • Ensure the patient is not under undue external influence. Consider discussion in private. • Assess for and take into consideration any condition which may impair decision making capacity such as acute or chronic psychiatric illness, acute drug or alcohol intoxication, CVA, hypotension, hypoglycemia, hypoxia, head trauma, or any other condition with similar effect. If a patient cannot express his/her wishes, either verbally or non-verbally, and no surrogate decision maker is available (see below), treatment should follow standard protocols.        EMT 
      EMT  Only if the patient is determined to lack capacity or competence, the following individuals may act as a surrogate decision maker, in descending order of authority: • Legal agent, guardian, or committee (appointed by a court of law) • Medical power of attorney (appointed by the patient) • Patient’s spouse – except in cases where divorce has been filed. • Adult child of the patient • Parent of the patient • Adult sibling of the patient • Other adult relative of the patient in descending order of blood relationship. Ensure the surrogate decision maker has clinical decision-making capacity (see above)       EMT  

--- PAGE 28 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Patient Refusal of Treatment/Transport Version: March 2024 Patient Refusal of Treatment/Transport 
 EMT Clearly document the information provided to the patient/surrogate decision maker regarding potential risks and benefits of any proposed treatment and alternatives. If treatment and/or transport are refused, obtain signatures from the patient or authorized surrogate decision maker and at least one adult witness, when possible.  EMT         EMT For patients in cardiac arrest: • A DNR/DDNR/DNAR (Do Not Resuscitate) is applicable ONLY if the patient is in cardiac arrest. • Order such as POST, POLST, and MOLST forms may or may not include a specific DNR/DNI order and are valid if signed by a physician. • A valid DNR (original or unaltered physical or electronic copy issued in any state) or alternative DDNR jewelry is required to withhold resuscitation of patients not within a qualified health care facility or receiving hospice/home health care services. • Other DNR orders (e.g. electronic patient record) can be honored when a patient is within a qualified health care facility, during transfer between health care facilities, or receiving hospice or health care services at home. • A valid living will or other advanced directive may be used to guide therapy and discussions with surrogate decision makers/Medical Control, but is generally applicable only to terminal illness and should not be used to withhold attempts at resuscitation in the event of cardiac arrest. • A DNR can be revoked at any time by the patient or authorized decision maker (if the decision maker initiated the DNR) by physically destroying the DNR order form or oral expression of intent to revoke.         EMT  EMT If there is any doubt as to the applicability or validity of a DNR or other advanced directive belonging to a patient in cardiac arrest, begin CPR and contact Medical Control immediately for guidance.  EMT  EMT For patients with acute psychiatric emergencies who present a significant risk of harm to themselves or others and are refusing treatment or transport, contact law enforcement regarding issuance of an Emergency Custody Order (ECO) for psychiatric evaluation.  EMT  MC For patients with acute medical emergencies who lack decision-making capacity or competence and are refusing treatment or transport, contact Medical Control regarding issuance of an Emergency Custody Order (ECO) for medical evaluation. See Pearls. Medical ECO requires MC to petition a magistrate. * Contact law enforcement to assist, as needed.  MC     MC Contact Medical Control for assistance in situations including but not limited to: • The EMS provider strongly believes the patient would benefit from or suffer without further medical attention which is being refused against the advice of providers on-scene. • The EMS provider believes the patient lacks capacity or competence but is unwilling to be treated or transported (see above). * • The EMS provider is unsure of the patient’s or surrogate’s decision-making capacity. • The EMS provider is unsure as to the validity or applicability of an advanced directive or the authority of an available surrogate decision maker. Whenever possible, allow the Medical Control physician to speak directly with the patient or surrogate decision maker.     MC 

--- PAGE 29 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Patient Refusal of Treatment/Transport Version: March 2024 Patient Refusal of Treatment/Transport 
PEARLS  • For medical emergencies, issuance of an emergency custody order (ECO) for medical evaluation requires a licensed physician to petition a magistrate or special justice. Early discussion with Medical Control to provide a detailed description of the current clinical situation and concerns, assessment of decision-making capacity, and any pertinent clinical information is critical. • Medical power of attorney only comes into effect when a patient lacks decision-making capacity. • Attempt to obtain a copy of any documentation assigning guardianship or medical power of attorney. If unavailable, you may accept the individual’s assertion as long as you do so in good faith and do not have any evidence or knowledge that the person is misrepresenting himself/herself as a guardian or medical power of attorney. • In the absence of available parents, an adult in whose care a minor has been entrusted, such as a teacher or caregiver, may act as a surrogate decision maker in the place of a parent (“in loco parentis”). • A minor shall be deemed an adult for the purpose of consenting to: o Services needed to determine the presence of or to treat venereal disease of any infectious or contagious disease that the State board of Health requires to be reported o Services required in case of birth control, pregnancy or family planning o Services required in the case of outpatient care, treatment, or rehabilitation for substance abuse o Services required in the outpatient care, treatment, or rehabilitation for mental or emotional disturbance • A pregnant minor shall be deemed an adult for the sole purpose of giving consent for herself and her child to surgical and medical treatment relating to the delivery of her child. Thereafter, the minor mother shall be deemed an adult for the purpose of giving consent to surgical and medical treatment for her child. • Treatment and/or transport of a minor is authorized if delay may adversely affect the minor’s recovery and no authorized person is available to provide consent. If the minor is 14 years of age or older and physically capable of giving consent, such consent shall be obtained first.

--- PAGE 30 ---
 
        This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 31 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Patient Restraint Version: March 2024 Patient Restraint 
PURPOSE To ensure the safety of patients and responders: patient restraint should be utilized only if the patient is exhibiting behavior that is an immediate danger to self or others Restraint Guidelines • Use the minimum level of physical restraint required to accomplish patient care and ensure safe transportation (soft restraints may be sufficient). o If law enforcement or additional staff is needed, call for assistance prior to attempting restraint procedures. o Do not endanger yourself or other responders or the patient. • Avoid placing restraints in such a way as to prevent evaluation of the patient’s medical needs. • Consider and treat medical causes of combativeness (hypoxia, head injury, hypoglycemia). • Consider whether the patient is exhibiting any other signs or symptoms of potential mental incapacity, including signs of drug or alcohol use, unsteady gait, slurred speech, etc. PHYSICAL RESTRAINT PROCEDURE • Evaluate the personnel needed to safely restrain the patient. • Place the patient face up on a long backboard – NEVER PRONE. • Secure all extremities to the backboard- check circulation in restrained extremities every 15 minutes. • Attempt to restrain lower extremities first, using soft restraints around both ankles. • Restrain the patient’s arms at their sides. • If necessary, utilize cervical spine precautions (tape, foam blocks, CID, etc.) to control violent head or body movements. • Secure the backboard to the stretcher using the straps on the stretcher, particularly the over-the-shoulder straps. • Evaluate the patient’s respiratory and cardiac status to assure no airway compromise exists; attempt to place SpO2 device and apply supplemental oxygen if indicated. • DO NOT tighten chest straps to the point of impeding respiratory function. CHEMICAL RESTRAINT PROCEDURE • Assess vital signs within the first 5 minutes and thereafter as appropriate (at least every 10 minutes and prior to any repeat dose of medication), or document reason for lack of vital signs assessment. • Monitor ECG, obtain 12-Lead, consider IN medications and establish IV/IO if possible. • Sedative agents may be needed to restrain the violently combative patient. If chemical restraint is required, see Behavioral Emergencies Protocol    

--- PAGE 32 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Patient Restraint Version: March 2024 Patient Restraint 
RESTRAINT DOCUMENTATION PROCEDURE Document a response to each of the following questions: • In what manner was your patient violent? Record patient’s comments verbatim. • Did you feel threatened? Why? • Were you concerned about your patient’s outcome without emergency medical interventions? Why? • Could you treat your patient appropriately without the use of restraints? • Which law enforcement officer was present? If patient was transported in handcuffs, which officer accompanied patient to ED in ambulance? If no law enforcement officer accompanied patient, why? • What kind of restraints did you use? • Where on your patient were these restraints used? • Document the frequency of respiratory and mental status change assessments. Constant evaluation of your patient’s airway status is extremely important.   

--- PAGE 33 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Safe Transport of Pediatric Patients Version: March 2024 Safe Transport of Pediatric Patients 
PURPOSE To identify the “best practice” for ambulance transportation of ill or injured pediatric patients. Ambulances are NOT EXEMPT from state child safety laws.  POLICY Safety measures should be used to provide safe transport for all patients.  PROCEDURE • Drive cautiously and at safe speeds, observing applicable traffic laws. • Attempt to arrange for transportation of adults and children who are not patients by alternative means. • Secure all monitoring devices and other equipment to prevent injury. • Ensure pediatric patients under 40 kg (88 lbs) are restrained with approved child restraint devices secured per the manufacturer’s instructions. • Ensure that all EMS providers use available restraining devices or systems during transport. • For pediatric patients having medical conditions aggravated by stress, make every reasonable attempt to maximize safety while comforting the child. • DO NOT allow parents, caregivers or any passenger to be unrestrained during transport. • DO NOT hold, attempt to hold, or permit parents or caregivers to hold the patient during transport; parents or caregivers should be secured using safety belts. • Infants and children meeting Trauma Triage criteria should be transported in a child restraint device unless requiring relocation to or placement on an immobilization device. 

--- PAGE 34 ---
 
        This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 35 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures STEMI Field Triage Version: March 2024 STEMI Field Triage 
PURPOSE To rapidly identify patients experiencing acute myocardial infarction and transport them safely to definitive care.  PROCEDURE When executing the Acute Coronary Syndromes Protocol, acquire a 12-lead ECG within 5 minutes of arrival at patient. If interpretation by a qualified provider or machine is that of STEMI, activate the STEMI alert system by notifying the closest PCI center within 30 minutes EMS transport time. Use the STEMI Triage Decision Scheme to decide method of transport and appropriate facility. When in doubt, contact local medical control. Field STEMI Triage Decision Scheme Cardiac symptoms AND • 12-lead ECG criteria of 1 mm (or more) ST elevation in 2 (or more) contiguous leads OR • 12-lead ECG interpretation with an “ACUTE MI” statement   Transport to Closest PCI Capable Hospital Listed Early Notification/Activation Call receiving facility with patient’s name/DOB • Bon Secours Mary Immaculate Hospital @ (757) 875-5202 • Bon Secours Memorial RMC (ODEMSA) @ (804)764-6655 • Henrico Doctors' Hospital (ODEMSA) @ (804) 977-5888 • Mary Washington Hospital (REMS) @ (540) 373-0348 Or (540) 741-4768 • Riverside RMC @ (757) 594-2057 • Sentara CarePlex Hospital @ (757) 224-4188 • Sentara Heart Hospital (TEMS) @ (757) 730-5050 • Sentara Williamsburg RMC @ (757) 984-7185 • Spotsylvania RMC (REMS) @ (540) 898-1751 • VCU Medical Center (ODEMSA) @ (804) 828-3989 Transport to Closest Hospital Early Notification/Activation  Activate Helicopter EMS (HEMS) Transport to Closest Listed PCI Capable Hospital w/ Surgical Capabilities Early Notification/Activation 
▪ Bon Secours Maryview Medical Center (TEMS) 
▪ Bon Secours Memorial RMC (ODEMSA) 
▪ Henrico Doctors' Hospital (ODEMSA) 
▪ Mary Washington Hospital (REMS) 
▪ Riverside RMC 
▪ Sentara Heart Hospital (TEMS) 
▪ VCU Medical Center (ODEMSA)  Any patient with a compromised airway or impending circulatory collapse should be taken to the closest Emergency Department. 12-lead ECG Findings = STEMI  PCI Capable hospital within 30 minutes  EMS transport Time? Helicopter EMS (HEMS) within 30 minutes  of patient’s location? Yes 
Yes No No 

--- PAGE 36 ---
 
        This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 37 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Stroke Field Triage Version: March 2024 Stroke Field Triage 
PURPOSE To rapidly get patients experiencing a stroke to definitive care.  PROCEDURE When executing the stroke protocol, evaluate the patient using the RACE exam. If any part of the test returns positive (RACE Score ³ 1), activate the stroke alert system by notifying the appropriate facility. Use the stroke triage decision algorithm below to decide method of transport and appropriate facility. If you have questions contact local medical control. Once the patient is in transport call the receiving facility’s COR with the patient’s Name/DOB.    
          
Evaluate using RACE score. Is RACE score 5 or greater? 
YES 
NO 
Assess blood glucose. Is glucose greater than 60? 
Correct  
YES 
< 24 hours or unknown Attendant-in-charge suspects acute stroke based on history and physical exam 
Determine time of onset or time last known to be “normal”. Initiate transport to Comprehensive Stroke Center Provide early notification to on-line medical control and/or the certified Stroke Center of patient with acute stroke presentation. Provide care during transport as directed by protocols or on-line medical control.  If transport to Comprehensive Stroke Center increases transport time by 30 minutes or greater, transport to nearest Primary Stroke Center. 
YES Transport to closest Stroke Center (Acute Stroke Ready, Primary or Comprehensive) 
>24 hours NO 

--- PAGE 38 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 39 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Transportation & Destination Determination Version: March 2024 Transportation & Destination Determination 
PURPOSE To assure respect for patient decision-making capacity, while still providing safe, appropriate medical transportation.  PROCEDURE 1. Patients with decision-making capacity are to be transported to the hospital emergency department of their choice within the policies of the transporting agency* with the following exceptions: a. The patient exhibiting the symptoms and/or clinical criteria consistent with an ST elevation MI (STEMI); the patient destination should be consistent with the PEMS Regional STEMI Plan, i.e. a STEMI Receiving Center. b. The patient exhibiting the symptoms and/or clinical criteria consistent with a Stroke/CVA; the patient destination should be consistent with the PEMS Stroke Triage Plan, to a designated stroke center. c. Th patient exhibiting symptoms and/or clinical criteria consistent with the PEMS Regional Prehospital and Interhospital Trauma Plan, i.e. a trauma center d. The patient exhibiting the symptoms and/or clinical criteria such that the patient should be  transported to a burn center. e. The patient requires EMERGENT transport to the closest hospital when, in the judgment of the AIC, the patient is unstable due to one or more of the following conditions: i. Inability to establish or maintain a protected airway ii. Severe respiratory distress unresponsive to prehospital therapies iii. Circulatory failure with an inability to achieve hemodynamic stability iv. Abnormal delivery (e.g., breech, shoulder, or prolapsed cord) v. Post cardiac arrest vi. Continuing seizures unresponsive to midazolam vii. Patient presenting in non-trauma related shock viii. Any other life-threatening condition the AIC believes to be time critical 2. If the patient has no hospital preference, transport should be to the closest most appropriate hospital. 3. Any time a patient is transported to the most appropriate facility other than the one requested, the reason for the change and destination the most appropriate facility shall be documented on the Patient Care Report. 4. Certified providers may contact HEMS (Medical Control permission not necessary) if HEMS can provide transportation more beneficial to the patient than the resources on scene. If the patient is ready for transport AND air ambulance is delayed for more than 10 minutes, initiate ground transport to the closest hospital, or helispot/helipad. 5. If approved by agency Operational Medical Director/Emergency Physician, alternate destinations may be established.  * Agencies shall have an internal policy explaining the destination poliy specific to that agency (i.e., the agency will not transport further than a specified hospital due to the extended time away from the community). 

--- PAGE 40 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 41 ---
 
 PURPOSE  Appropriately identify patients experiencing mental health crisis that can benefit from direct transport to Behavioral health facility.  PROCEDURE  Once a patient in crisis has been identified the Field Triage Decision protocol will be used to consider direct transport to a Mental Health Facility. When in doubt, contact Medical Control.   FIELD TRIAGE DECISION SCHEME Patient’s complaint Suicidal Ideations/Homicidal Ideations  Seeking Substance abuse help Mood disorder Depression / Anxiety  Psychosis / schizophrenia / Bipolar Is patient oriented to person, place and time? Confirms prior psych history? No concern for infectious process? No indications of intentional overdose? No significant Trauma? No strangulation injury? Is the patient between ages of 5 and 60? Has the patient been chemically sedated?  Transport to appropriate ED  
Physical Exam Temp greater than 100.4 HR less than 50 or greater than 120 BP less than 90 or greater than 180 RR less than 12 or greater than 28 Glucose less than 70 mg/dL or greater than 350 Loss of Consciousness Any Stroke or TIA Symptoms? Does the patient require supplemental oxygen or airway support?   Consider Direct Transport to BH Center -Contact RMHRC or CHKD 
Behavioral Health Transport Decision Algorithm  
Is the patient pregnant?  Contact RMHRC Med Control 
Contact RMHRC Med Control Provide the following information: Gestational age Presence or absence of prenatal care Presence or absence of abdominal pain Presence or absence of bleeding 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
Transport to local ED 
Yes 
No 

--- PAGE 42 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 43 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Trauma Field Triage Version: March 2024 Trauma Field Triage 
PURPOSE To rapidly get trauma victims to definitive care.  PROCEDURE A trauma patient who meets any of the following criteria shall be transported to the closest appropriate trauma center within a 30-minute ground transport time. Trauma victims who are not within 30 minutes ground transport radius to a trauma center should be transported to the closest hospital unless they can be delivered to a trauma center more rapidly by helicopter EMS (HEMS).  Physiologic Criteria • Glasgow Coma Scale of less than 14, or • Systolic blood pressure of less than 90 mmHg, or • Respiratory rate of less than 10 or greater than 29 breaths per minute (less than 20 breaths per minute in infants less than 1 year old) Anatomic Criteria • Penetrating injury to head, neck, torso or extremities proximal to elbow and knee • Flail chest • Two or more proximal long-bone fractures • Crushed, degloved, or mangled extremity • Amputation proximal to wrist and ankle • Pelvic fracture • Open or depressed skull fracture • Paralysis Mechanism of Injury • Falls o Adults – greater than 20 feet o Children less than 15 years old – greater than 10 feet, or two to three times child’s height • High-risk auto crash o Intrusion – more than 12 inches into occupant site or more than 18 inches into any site o Ejection (partial or complete) from automobile o Death in same passenger compartment • Auto versus pedestrian/bicyclists - thrown, run over, or with significant impact (greater than 20 mph) • Motorcycle crash at speed greater than 20 mph     Special Considerations The following situations should increase your index of suspicion for injury: 

--- PAGE 44 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Trauma Field Triage Version: March 2024 Trauma Field Triage 
• Burns - absent other trauma, burns that meet burn center criteria should be transported to a burn center  • Pregnancy – injured women who are more than 20 weeks pregnant should be considered for transport to trauma center or a hospital with obstetrical resources. • Age – greater than 55 years • Age and Injury- Severely injured pediatric patients should be transferred to a trauma center        or pediatric trauma center. • Anticoagulation and bleeding disorders – EMS should contact medical control and consider transport to a trauma center. • End-Stage Renal Disease – Patients with end-stage renal disease requiring dialysis • Time-sensitive extremity injury – open fracture(s) or fracture(s) with neurovascular compromise • EMS provider judgement – EMS providers have the experience and expertise to make judgments regarding atypical patient presentation Procedure: Agencies operating within a 30-minute ground transport radius of a trauma center (e.g. Riverside Regional Medical Center, Sentara Norfolk General Hospital, Mary Washington Hospital, and Virginia Commonwealth University Medical Center) 1. Provide appropriate care and initiate immediate transport (scene time less than 10 minutes) towards trauma center. 2. Establish early radio contact to alert trauma center staff. 3. Transport immediately; otherwise document the reason for the delay. Agencies operating outside a 30-minute ground transport time to a trauma center: 1. Field transports of trauma patients by helicopter (HEMS) should be considered: a. if patient meets the clinical triage criteria for transport and should be transported to a Level I or Level II trauma center. b. if patient requires a level of care greater than can be expected from the local ground provider AND HEMS can be on scene in a time shorter than the ground unit can transport to the closest hospital. 2. Technicians can request HEMS transport without authorization by medical control. 3. If HEMS is delayed or unavailable, transport patients meeting trauma center criteria to the closest hospital keeping in mind the on-scene time should be 10 minutes or less. 4. Establish early contact with the destination hospital. A facility may divert patients to a trauma center en route or expedite transfer after arrival. 5. For patients that meet mechanism of injury criteria, but do not meet anatomic and physiologic criteria, the technician should contact medical control to determine the destination hospital.     

--- PAGE 45 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Trauma Field Triage Version: March 2024 Trauma Field Triage 
PEARLS • Transport all patients with unmanageable/uncontrolled airway or uncontrolled hemorrhage to the closest • hospital emergency department. • Traumatic cardiac arrest– if transporting, transport to the closest hospital emergency department. • Consider transport to a pediatric center (CHKD or VCU Medical Center) for pediatric patients meeting the above trauma triage criteria. • Consider transport to a burn center (Sentara Norfolk General Hospital or VCU Medical Center) for patients with burn injuries meeting the following criteria: o Partial-thickness burn of greater than 10% BSA o Electrical burns, including lightning injury o Full-thickness burns o Circumferential burns o Chemical burns                   

--- PAGE 46 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 47 ---
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures  
Table of Contents 
Version: March 2024  Table of Contents 
Title ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  …Effective  Date  
Universal  Protocol  (General) ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  03/2024  
Airway 
Sedation  Assisted  (Non- Paralytic) ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  03/2024  
Cardiac Arrest  
Asystole and Pulseless  Electrical  Activity  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 03/2024  
Post  Resuscitation  Care  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 03/2024  
Cardiac Arrest Traumatic………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..03/2024  
V-Fib/Pulseless  V-Tach ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 03/2024  
Environmental 
Cold  Exposure  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  03/2024 
Heat Exposure  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  03/2024  
General 
Behavioral/Patient  Restraint ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  03/2024  
Hemorrhage  Control  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 03/2024  
Pain Control  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  03/2024  
Trauma ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  03/2024  
Injury  
Burns - Thermal  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  03/2024  
Crush  Syndrome  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 03/2024  
Diving and  Drowning Emergencies  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  03/2024  
Electrical  Injuries  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 03/2024  

--- PAGE 48 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Table of Contents Version: March 2024 Table of Contents 
 Medical  Allergic Reaction/Anaphylaxis ............................................................................................................................. 03/2024  Bradycardia ......................................................................................................................................................... 03/2024  Chest Pain – Cardiac Suspected .......................................................................................................................... 03/2024  Hypertension ....................................................................................................................................................... 03/2024  Hypoglycemia/Hyperglycemia ............................................................................................................................ 03/2024  Hypotension/Shock (Non-Trauma) ..................................................................................................................... 03/2024  Nausea/Vomiting ................................................................................................................................................ 03/2024  Overdose/Poisoning/Toxic Ingestion .................................................................................................................. 03/2024  Respiratory Distress/Asthma/COPD/Reactive Airway ......................................................................................... 03/2024  Seizure ................................................................................................................................................................. 03/2024  Sepsis .................................................................................................................................................................. 03/2024  Stroke/TIA ........................................................................................................................................................... 03/2024  Supraventricular Tachycardia (including Atrial Fibrillation) ................................................................................ 03/2024  Ventricular Tachycardia with Pulse ..................................................................................................................... 03/2024  OB/GYN  Childbirth/Labor/Delivery ................................................................................................................................... 03/2024  Eclampsia ............................................................................................................................................................ 03/2024  Pregnancy Related Emergencies ......................................................................................................................... 03/2024  

--- PAGE 49 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact Version: March 2024 Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact 
CRITERIA • The Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol applies to all patients and is the foundation for all patient care. A universal patient care protocol allows other protocols to focus on their specific goals for patient management.  • While the steps listed below may occur in order, the dynamics of an emergency scene may dictate a change to the order in which they occur.  PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Scene Safety / PPE / Patient Contact • Utilize appropriate agencies and resources as needed to ensure patient and provider safety including lift assistance, personnel, ALS, or law enforcement.  • Bring all necessary equipment to the patient’s side.  EMR EMR Initial Assessment • Perform Primary and Secondary Survey as indicated by patient status.  • Consider spinal motion restriction if indicated by mechanism of injury or history from patient or witness. Refer to Spinal Motion Restriction procedure. EMR EMR Ensure Adequate Airway, Oxygenation, and Ventilation  • Manage airway by the least invasive means necessary.  • Home oxygen should be maintained unless the patient’s oxygen saturation and/or symptoms indicate need for it to be increased.  • Administer up to 15 LPM oxygen through an appropriate delivery device for the patient’s condition. • Refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory support procedure. EMR EMR Vital Signs • Obtain blood pressure, pulse rate, respirations, and Glasgow Coma Scale. • Consider obtaining blood glucose level and temperature. • Closely monitor the patient, paying specific attention to their condition immediately before or after an intervention. o Stable: Reassess vital signs at least every 15 minutes  o Unstable: Reassess vital signs at least every 5 minutes  EMR EMR Refer to relevant and appropriate protocols. If no protocol applies, or for clinical guidance at any time, consider contacting Medical Control. EMR EMT Assess SpO2. Consider assessing EtCO2 and/or SpCO as indicated.   EMT 

--- PAGE 50 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact Version: March 2024 Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact 
EMT Consider 12-Lead ECG. Refer to Chest Pain (Cardiac) protocol.  • Acquire within 5 minutes of patient contact. • Transmit to receiving facility within 10 minutes of patient contact. EMT EMT Medication Administration • Confirm all medication administration “Rights”: o Right patient o Right medication o Right dose o Right route  o Right time  • Ensure medications are not expired. • Assess for drug-drug interactions and contraindications. o Refer to Pharmacology section and/or agency approved standard reference. EMT A Establish IV / IO access when indicated. Refer to Intraosseous (IO) Access procedure, as needed. A I Consider continuous cardiac monitoring. I EMT Transport  • Transport decisions should be based on patient’s clinical condition. Refer to relevant regional Field Triage policies regarding transport to specialty centers (Stroke, STEMI, Trauma). • Deliver a pre-arrival report to the receiving facility as soon as practical. • Consult with Medical Control regarding most appropriate destination or for clinical guidance whenever necessary.  • Refer to Patient Refusal of Treatment / Transport policy, as needed. EMT           

--- PAGE 51 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact Version: March 2024 Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact 
PEARLS Glasgow Coma Scale  1 2 3 4 5 6 Eye Opening Does not open Opens to Pain Opens to voice Spontaneous Eye opening   Verbal Makes no sound Incomprehensible sounds Inappropriate words Confused, disoriented Oriented and converses normally   Motor Makes no movement Extension to pain (Decerebrate) Abnormal flexion to pain (Decorticate) Flexion or withdrawal to pain Localizes pain Obeys commands       Infant Age Guidelines Newborn Up to 48 hours following birth Neonates Up to 28 days following birth         

--- PAGE 52 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact Version: March 2024 Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact 
Altered Mental Status Differential Diagnosis (AEIOU TIPS) A Alcohol E Endocrine, Encephalopathy, Electrolytes I Insulin (hypoglycemia / hyperglycemia) O Oxygen (hypoxia), Opiates (drugs of abuse) U Uremia   T Toxins, Trauma, Temperature (hyperthermia / hypothermia) I Infection P Psychiatric, Porphyria  S Stroke, Shock, Subarachnoid/Intracranial Hemorrhage, Space-occupying CNS Lesion, Seizure           Altered Mental Status Differential Diagnosis (SMASHED 2) S Substrates Glucose (high/low), thiamine deficiency  Sepsis  M Meningitis CNS infection, dementia, encephalitis  Mental illness Acute psychosis, medication noncompliance, mania, depression 

--- PAGE 53 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact Version: March 2024 Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact 
A Alcohol Intoxication, withdrawal   Accident Head trauma, CVA, cerebral contusion, intracranial hemorrhage S Seizure  Active seizure or post-ictal state  Stimulants  Cocaine, amphetamines, PCP, LSD, ketamine,  H Hyper - Hypertension, hyperthyroidism, hypercarbia, hyperthermia  Hypo -  Hypotension, hypothyroidism, hypoxia, hypothermia E Electrolytes Sodium, calcium, potassium  Encephalopathy Hepatic, uremic, hypertensive D Drugs Intoxication or withdrawal   Don’t forget other drugs   

--- PAGE 54 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 55 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Sedation Post Advanced Airway Version: January 2025 Sedation Post Advanced Airway 
CRITERIA • Any patient receiving invasive ventilatory support following endotracheal intubation or placement of an advanced airway including supraglottic airway devices.  PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMT Confirm and monitor airway placement with continuous SpO2 and box-waveform EtCO2. EMT I Administer:   ADULT: Fentanyl (Sublimaze) 25 – 50 mcg IV/IO over 2 minutes or IN/IM   PEDIATRIC: Fentanyl (Sublimaze) 0.5 – 1 mcg/kg IV/IO over 2 minutes or IN/IM Maximum dose 25 mcg.   Repeat every 10 – 15 minutes as needed for patient safety and comfort.  I 
I If Fentanyl is not sufficient, administer:  ADULT: Midazolam (Versed) 2.5 mg IV/IO over 2 minutes or 5 mg IN/IM  PEDIATRIC: Midazolam (Versed) 0.1 mg/kg IV/IO over 2 minutes or 0.2 mg/kg IN/IM Maximum dose 2.5 mg IV/IO or 5 mg IN/IM   Repeat every 10 - 15 minutes as needed for patient safety and comfort.  I MC Contact Medical Control for guidance if unable to adequately manage patient agitation or discomfort. MC  PEARLS • Adjust ventilation rate or volume to maintain EtCO2 of 35 – 45 mmHg following advanced airway placement.  • Closely monitor for hypotension following intubation and sedation. Positive pressure ventilation increases the risk of pneumothorax and reduced preload, both of which can result in sudden drops in mean arterial pressure.  • Use suction to remove blood, secretions and vomitus as needed.  • Use lower doses of Fentanyl for opiate naïve, frail, low weight, hypotensive, hemodynamically labile, or elderly (> 65 years) patients.  

--- PAGE 56 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 57 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Cardiac Arrest: Asystole / PEA Version: January 2024 Cardiac Arrest: Asystole / PEA 
CRITERIA • Any patient without a palpable pulse or respiration, and with Asystole or Pulseless Electrical Activity (PEA) evidence on the cardiac monitor (check two leads), or AED advising not to shock. • Patients with a valid durable DNR, rigor mortis, lividity, decomposition, or injuries inconsistent with survival are excluded.  PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Determine DNR status. Refer to Death and Criteria for Withholding Resuscitation protocol. EMR EMR Begin chest compressions. Refer to Adult / Pediatric Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) procedure. EMR EMR Identify and treat potentially reversible causes. See Pearls below. EMR EMT Consider spinal motion restriction. EMT A Obtain IV/IO access (humeral IO preferred if IV unavailable). A A Administer:  ADULT: Epinephrine 1 mg IV/IO [0.1 mg/mL concentration] PEDIATRIC: Epinephrine 0.01 mg/kg IV/IO [0.1 mg/mL concentration] Repeat every 3-5 minutes during cardiac arrest. A 
I For cardiac arrest in renal dialysis patients, patients with crush injuries, suspected calcium channel blocker overdose, or suspected hyperkalemia only, also administer:  ADULT: Calcium Chloride 1 g IV/IO slow push  Followed by 20 mL 0.9% sodium chloride flush  ADULT: Sodium Bicarbonate 50 mEq IV/IO slow push  PEDIATRIC: Calcium Chloride 20mg/kg (max dose 1g) IV/IO slow push  Followed by 20 mL 0.9% sodium chloride flush PEDIATRIC: Sodium Bicarbonate 1 mEq/kg (max dose 50 mEq) IV/IO slow push   Repeat in 5 minutes if no change. I MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  See Pearls below regarding Termination of Resuscitation. MC  

--- PAGE 58 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Cardiac Arrest: Asystole / PEA Version: January 2024 Cardiac Arrest: Asystole / PEA 
PEARLS Compressions:  • Push hard and fast: rate 100 – 120 bpm. Allow complete chest recoil.  • Minimize interruptions in chest compressions.  • Change compressors every 2 minutes or sooner if fatigued • Give continuous compressions with advanced airway  • Use quantitative EtCO2 monitoring with BVM o If EtCO2 is less than 10 mmHg, improve chest compressions  o If sudden increase in EtCO2 is noted (above 30-40 mmHg), check pulse and rhythm for ROSC. Airway: • Use of advanced airways have not been shown to improve outcomes for children with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Focus on high quality BLS airway management.  • Studies to date have not shown a clear improvement in outcomes with SGA vs intubation – do not compromise chest compressions for intubation. • Avoid excessive ventilation. Maximize preload.  • Use EtCO2 to confirm and monitor placement of any advanced airway.  • Continually monitor EtCO2 with target above 10 mmHg during CPR and 35-45 mmHg once ROSC is achieved.  • In post ROSC patients, if EtCO2 falls below 20 mmHg or signal is lost, immediately reassess pulses and airway. Reversible causes:  • Ensure IV/IO patency. • Identify and treat per appropriate protocol and scope of practice: o Hypoxia o Hyperkalemia or Hypokalemia  o Hyperthermia or Hypothermia o Hypovolemia o Hydrogen ion (acidosis) o Hyperglycemia or Hypoglycemia o Tension pneumothorax/hemothorax  o Tamponade (Cardiac) o Thrombosis (Cardiac, Pulmonary) o Toxins o Trauma o Tablets (Overdose)Termination of Resuscitation (TOR): • Refer to Death & Criteria for Withholding Resuscitation protocol. • Termination of resuscitative efforts is a Medical Control decision only.  • Consider contacting Medical Control to request TOR if the arrest was not witnessed by EMS and after 20 minutes of continuous CPR:  1. There has been no return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) AND 2. No shocks were delivered.  

--- PAGE 59 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Cardiac Arrest: Post ROSC Care Version: January 2024 Cardiac Arrest: Post ROSC Care 
CRITERIA • Any patient with return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) following cardiac arrest.  PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Follow Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure. EMR EMT Assess blood glucose. If less than 60 mg/dL, refer to Hypoglycemia protocol.  EMT EMT Obtain and transmit a 12-Lead ECG.  If STEMI is identified, follow Administrative Policy - STEMI Field Triage. EMT A Obtain IV/IO access (humeral IO preferred if IV unavailable). A A Consider:  ADULT: 0.9% Sodium chloride up to 1 L IV/IO in 250 – 500 mL boluses  PEDIATRIC: 0.9% Sodium chloride 20 mL/kg IV/IO Repeat as needed to maintain adequate perfusion, up to 60 mL/kg total. A I Maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP) above 65 mmHg. Consider:  ADULT: Norepinephrine (Levophed) infusion 5 – 20 mcg/min IV/IO (Add 4 mg of Norepinephrine to 250 mL 0.9% Sodium chloride = 16 mcg/mL) OR ADULT: Epinephrine infusion 2 – 10 mcg/min IV/IO  (Add 1 mg of Epinephrine [1mg/mL] to 100 mL of 0.9% Sodium chloride = 10 mcg/mL) I 
[ I ] Maintain age adjusted SBP. Consider:  PEDIATRIC: Epinephrine 0.1  - 1 mcg/kg/min IV/IO infusion. Max dose: 10 mcg/min.  Under 1 year old: Titrate to SBP > 70 mmHg Over 1 year old: Titrate to SBP > 90 mmHg (Add 1 mg of Epinephrine [1mg/mL] to 100 mL of 0.9% Sodium chloride = 10 mcg/mL) Note: Infusion via IV pump is preferred is available. Monitor closely for signs of extravasation. [ I ] P To maintain MAP > 65 until a vasopressor infusion is prepared, consider:  ADULT: Push dose Epinephrine 5-10 mcg IV/IO every 2-3 minutes  (Add 100 mcg Epinephrine (1mL of 0.1 mg/mL) to 9mL of 0.9% Normal Saline = 10 mcg / mL) P 

--- PAGE 60 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Cardiac Arrest: Post ROSC Care Version: January 2024 Cardiac Arrest: Post ROSC Care 
 PEARLS • Most patients will require at least some vasopressor support to maintain a MAP > 65 following cardiac arrest.  • Push dose Epinephrine may be administered as a “bridge” while establishing a drip, but does not replace a drip.  • Administer vasopressor through the largest, most proximal IV site available (AC or higher is preferable) or IO. Verify patency prior to initiating infusion and monitor closely for extravasation.  • Maintain normal ventilation rate. Continually monitor EtCO2 with target range being 35 – 45 mmHg.  • Identify and treat potentially reversible causes of cardiac arrest:  o Hypoxia o Hyperkalemia or hypokalemia o Hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia o Hypovolemia o Hydrogen Ion (acidosis)                  o Tension pneumothorax/hemothorax o Tamponade (Cardiac) o Thrombosis (Cardiac/pulmonary) o Toxins o Trauma o Tablets (overdose) 

--- PAGE 61 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocol, Policies and Procedures Cardiac Arrest: Traumatic Version: November 2023 Cardiac Arrest: Traumatic 
 CRITERIA • Any patient who has experienced blunt or penetrating trauma and is pulseless with apnea/agonal respirations.  • Patients with obvious signs of death are excluded.  PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Control sites of major active external bleeding. Refer to Hemorrhage Control procedure.  EMR EMR Begin chest compressions. Refer to Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) procedure.  Consider immediate transport to the closest Emergency Department or Trauma Center. EMR EMT Open the airway. Refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure. EMT EMT Apply AED or cardiac monitor. Assess rhythm (I / P): For Asystole at the time of EMS arrival: Consider withholding / terminating resuscitation. For PEA/Witnessed Asystole: Continue CPR.  For VF/VT: Continue CPR and defibrillate.  EMT A Obtain IV/IO access. Establish secondary IV/IO access if possible.  If blood products are not available, administer: ADULT: 0.9% Sodium chloride up to 1 L IV/IO in 250 – 500 mL boluses  PEDIATRIC: 0.9% Sodium chloride 20 mL/kg IV/IO Repeat as needed to maintain adequate perfusion, up to 60 mL/kg total. A I Secure airway with endotracheal intubation. Refer to Endotracheal Intubation procedure.  Note: Intubation of children under 12 years old is a Paramedic “red dot” skill only. I I If signs or suspicion of thoracoabdominal trauma are present (blunt or penetrating), perform bilateral chest decompression. Follow Chest Decompression procedure. Note: CPR should NOT impede procedural interventions when treating traumatic cardiac arrest.* I A If ROSC is not achieved, and rhythm remains PEA, administer: ADULT: 1 mg Epinephrine 0.1 mg/mL IV/IO PEDIATRIC: 0.01 mg/kg Epinephrine IV/IO Single dose only.  A MC If there are no signs of life after 15-20 minutes of resuscitation, or at any time for additional guidance including optimal destination determination, contact Medical Control.  If transporting and the patient is in cardiac arrest, transport to the closest Emergency Department. MC 

--- PAGE 62 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocol, Policies and Procedures Cardiac Arrest: Traumatic Version: November 2023 Cardiac Arrest: Traumatic 
 PEARLS • Unless loss of pulses is witnessed by EMS with immediate intervention, survival following traumatic cardiac arrest with an initial rhythm of asystole is very low (<1%). Providers must weigh the risks of resuscitation and transport (injury, infectious exposure etc.) against the potential benefit prior to initiating resuscitation.    • When possible, assess rhythm prior to initiating CPR. If the rhythm is asystole on arrival of EMS, consider withholding resuscitation.  • *Unlike non-traumatic cardiac arrest, the efficacy of CPR in trauma resuscitation is unclear. Prioritize addressing immediate reversible causes of hypotension/cardiac arrest such as chest decompression, volume expansion (preferably with whole blood), and airway management. CPR is needed, however, to circulate transfused blood and any medications or fluids administered.  • If available, blood products should be used rather than sodium chloride for treatment of hemorrhagic shock.  • Assess the scene and patient closely. If the degree of sustained trauma appears disproportionately minor, consider the possibility a medical incident may have preceded or been induced by the injury. If there is suspicion for a medical event, refer to the appropriate patient care protocol.  

--- PAGE 63 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Cardiac Arrest: V-fib / Pulseless V-Tach Version: January 2024 Cardiac Arrest: V-Fib / Pulseless V-Tach 
CRITERIA • Any patient unresponsive, without palpable pulse or respiration, and Ventricular Fibrillation (V-Fib) or Ventricular Tachycardia (V-Tach) apparent on the cardiac monitor (check 2 leads), or AED advising to shock. • Patients with a valid durable DNR or injuries inconsistent with survival are excluded. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Determine DNR status. Refer to Death and Criteria for Withholding Resuscitation protocol.  EMR EMR Begin chest compression. Follow Adult/Pediatric Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) procedure.  EMR EMR Identify and treat potentially reversible causes. See Pearls below. EMR EMT Consider spinal motion restriction.  EMT A Obtain IV/IO access (humeral IO preferred is IV unavailable). A A Administer:  ADULT: 0.9% Sodium Chloride IV/IO up to 1 L in 250 – 500 mL boluses PEDIATRIC: 0.9% Sodium Chloride 20 mL/kg IV/IO Repeat as needed to maintain adequate perfusion, up to 60 mL/kg total.  A I If VF or VT is present, or AED is advising to shock [EMR], immediately defibrillate:  ADULT: 200 joules Biphasic / 360 joules Monophasic, or manufacturer’s recommendation. PEDIATRIC: 2 joules/kg initial, 4 joules/kg subsequent After each defibrillation, perform 2 minutes of CPR, followed by rhythm assessment.  If VF / VT persists, defibrillate again, then consider medication therapy as listed below.  I A Administer:  ADULT: Epinephrine 1 mg IV/IO [0.1 mg/mL concentration] PEDIATRIC: Epinephrine 0.01 mg/kg IV/IO [0.1 mg/mL concentration] Repeat every 3-5 minutes during cardiac arrest.  A 

--- PAGE 64 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Cardiac Arrest: V-fib / Pulseless V-Tach Version: January 2024 Cardiac Arrest: V-Fib / Pulseless V-Tach 
I If VF / VT persists, administer:  ADULT: Amiodarone (Cordarone) 300 mg IV/IO slow push PEDIATRIC: Amiodarone (Cordarone) 5 mg/kg IV/IO slow push. Maximum dose 300 mg.  OR, if Amiodarone is unavailable, administer:  ADULT: Lidocaine (Xylocaine) 1 mg/kg IV/IO slow push. Maximum dose 100 mg. PEDIATRIC: Lidocaine (Xylocaine) 1 mg/kg IV/IO slow push. Maximum dose 50 mg. I 
I If VF / VT persists, ensure optimal defibrillator pad placement, then administer:  ADULT: Amiodarone (Cordarone) 150 mg IV/IO slow push PEDIATRIC: [Contact Medical Control] Amiodarone (Cordarone) 5 mg/kg IV/IO slow push. Maximum dose 150 mg.  OR, if Amiodarone is unavailable, administer:  ADULT: Lidocaine (Xylocaine) 0.5 mg/kg IV/IO slow push. Maximum dose 100 mg. PEDIATRIC: Lidocaine (Xylocaine) 1 mg/kg IV/IO slow push. Maximum dose 50 mg. I 
I If VF / VT persists, administer: ADULT: Magnesium Sulfate 2 g IV/IO slow push PEDIATRIC: [Contact Medical Control] Magnesium Sulfate 40 mg/kg IV/IO slow push.  Maximum dose 2 g. I 
I For cardiac arrest in renal dialysis patients, patients with crush injuries, suspected calcium channel blocker overdose or hyperkalemia only, also administer (preferably via separate lines):  ADULT: Calcium Chloride 1 g IV/IO slow push  Followed by 20 mL 0.9% sodium chloride flush  ADULT: Sodium Bicarbonate 50 mEq IV/IO slow push  PEDIATRIC: Calcium Chloride 20mg/kg (max dose 1g) IV/IO slow push  Followed by 20 mL 0.9% sodium chloride flush PEDIATRIC: Sodium Bicarbonate 1 mEq/kg (max dose 50 mEq) IV/IO slow push   Repeat in 5 minutes if no change. I EMR If return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) is achieved, refer to Cardiac Arrest: Post ROSC Care. EMR MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  See Pearls below regarding Termination of Resuscitation. MC 

--- PAGE 65 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Cardiac Arrest: V-fib / Pulseless V-Tach Version: January 2024 Cardiac Arrest: V-Fib / Pulseless V-Tach 
PEARLS Compressions:  • Push hard and fast: rate 100 – 120 bpm. Allow complete chest recoil.  • A common cause of refractory VF / VT is incorrect defibrillator pad placement. Ensure optimal initial placement and consider adjustment is multiple shocks are delivered without a change in rhythm. • Minimize interruptions in chest compressions.  • Change compressors every 2 minutes or sooner if fatigued • Give continuous compressions with advanced airway  • Use quantitative EtCO2 monitoring with BVM o If EtCO2 is less than 10 mmHg, improve chest compressions  o If sudden increase in EtCO2 is noted (above 30-40 mmHg), check pulse and rhythm for ROSC. Medications:  • Medications should be given without interruption of CPR. • Magnesium Sulfate should be considered for: Torsades de pointes, long QT, digitalis toxicity, or suspected hypomagnesemia.  • If there is no Epinephrine 0.1 mg/mL preloaded syringe, combine 1 mg of Epinephrine 1 mg/mL with 9 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride in a 10 mL syrine.  Airway: • Use of advanced airways have not been shown to improve outcomes for children with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Focus on high quality BLS airway management.  • Studies to date have not shown a clear improvement in outcomes with SGA vs intubation – do not compromise chest compressions for intubation. • Avoid excessive ventilation. Maximize preload.  • Use EtCO2 to confirm and monitor placement of any advanced airway.  • Continually monitor EtCO2 with target above 10 mmHg during CPR and 35-45 mmHg once ROSC is achieved.  • In post ROSC patients, if EtCO2 falls below 20 mmHg or signal is lost, immediately reassess pulses and airway. Reversible causes:  • Identify and treat per appropriate protocol and scope of practice: o Hypoxia o Hyperkalemia or Hypokalemia  o Hyperthermia or Hypothermia o Hypovolemia o Hydrogen ion (acidosis) o Hyperglycemia or Hypoglycemia o Tension pneumothorax/hemothorax  o Tamponade (Cardiac) o Thrombosis (Cardiac, Pulmonary) o Toxins o Trauma o Tablets (Overdose) 

--- PAGE 66 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Cardiac Arrest: V-Fib / Pulseless V-Tach Version: October 2023 Cardiac Arrest: V-Fib / Pulseless V-Tach 
Termination of Resuscitation (TOR): • Refer to Death & Criteria for Withholding Resuscitation protocol. • Termination of resuscitative efforts is a Medical Control decision only.  • Consider contacting Medical Control to request TOR if the arrest was not witnessed by EMS and after 20 minutes of continuous CPR:  1. There has been no return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) AND 2. No shocks were delivered.   

--- PAGE 67 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Cold Exposure Version: March 2024  Cold Exposure 
Environmental CRITERIA Patient exposed to extreme environmental conditions with symptoms that might include, but are not limited to: • CNS depression • Cardiac dysrhythmias • Abnormal vital signs • Suspect hypothermia in: o High-risk patients: very young or old patients, immobilized patients (e.g. prolonged entrapment), alcohol use, trauma/significant burns o High-risk environment: cold, windy environments, acute immersion incident PROTOCOL  EMR Follow General – Universal Patient Care/Initial Patient Contact Protocol. Use warmed and humidified O2 if available. EMR EMR Place patient in a warm environment and prevent further heat loss EMR EMR Remove all wet clothing and replace with warm blankets. Handle the patient gently and avoid excessive movement (risk of cardiac arrest) EMR EMR In the event of cardiac arrest, make persistent attempts at resuscitation for victims of prolonged cold exposure. Perform CPR and continuous warming procedures. EMR EMT Transport patient immediately with resuscitation efforts continued en route EMT Localized Cold Injury EMR Follow General – Universal Patient Care/Initial Patient Contact Protocol. EMR EMR Apply loose, sterile dressings to affected part EMR PEARLS • Hypothermia patients are fragile: Rough handling, IV insertion, intubation, etc. might cause VF that is refractory to defibrillation and antiarrhythmic agents- use AHA guidelines for hypothermic arrest. • DO NOT place heat packs, hot water bottles, IV bags, or other heat-retaining devices directly on skin • Contact Medical Control prior to use of AED • If cardiac arrest occurs, start CPR. Do not delay transport waiting for ALS • If the patient is alert and responsive, use active external rewarming with heat packs, warm blankets, etc • Assess pulse and respiratory rate for at least 60 seconds. • In Localized injuries DO NOT: o Allow patient to use the affected part o Rub the affected part o Expose the part to direct dry heat o Immerse the part in snow or hot water o Attempt to debride blisters • Remove jewelry and constricting items • During cardiac arrest, medications should be spaced at longer intervals 

--- PAGE 68 ---
 
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 69 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Heat Exposure Version: March 2024  Heat Exposure 
Environmental CRITERIA Patient exposed to extreme environmental conditions with symptoms that might include but are not limited to: • CNS depression • Cardiac dysrhythmias • Abnormal vital signs  PROTOCOL  EMR Follow General – Universal Patient Care/Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR     EMR Place patient in cool environment. EMR     EMT • Remove excess clothing. • If skin temperature is normal to touch: o Apply cool compresses. • If skin temperature is hot to touch: o Treat as life-threatening emergency. o Immediately start cooling process: 
▪ Fan the patient with cool mist if available. 
▪ Place ice packs in armpits, groin, and neck areas. 
▪ Place cool wet sheet over the patient. 
▪ If patient begins to shiver, slow cooling process.     EMT A Suspected heat stroke or hypovolemia: 20 mL/kg 0.9% Normal Saline up to 1000 mL bolus, continuously reassessing need for further fluid administration. A EMT Continuously reassess patient. EMT  PEARLS Consider cold IV fluids, if available, in heat stroke patient only. Use caution in the conscious patient  

--- PAGE 70 ---
 
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 71 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Behavioral Emergencies Version: January 2024 Behavioral Emergencies 
CRITERIA • Any patient with signs and/or symptoms of a psychiatric, medical, or traumatic emergency with agitated, aggressive, or combative behavior which poses a significant risk of harm to himself/herself or others.  • For patients less than 25 kg who cannot be safely managed with de-escalation techniques (see below), contact medical control for guidance.  PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Assess decision making capacity. Refer to administrative policy Patient Refusals. EMR EMR Restrain patient by least restrictive means necessary. Refer to administrative policy Patient Restraint. EMR EMR Assess and treat potential causes of agitation / altered mental status. See Pearls (*) below.  EMR EMR For mild agitation, follow de-escalation guidelines. See Pearls (**) below.  EMR EMT As soon as feasible, assess blood glucose and initiate continuous monitoring of respiratory effort and vital signs including HR, SpO2, and EtCO2. Assess and record blood pressure every 5 minutes.  EMT I As soon as feasible, assess and initiate continuous monitoring of cardiac rhythm.  I 
I For moderate agitation, consider:  ADULT: Haloperidol (Haldol) 5 mg IV/IO slow push or IM PEDIATRIC: Haloperidol (Haldol) 0.02 mg/kg IV/IO slow push or 0.05 mg/kg IM. Maximum dose: 1 mg IV/IO, 2.5 mg IM AND ADULT: Diphenhydramine (Benadryl) 50 mg IV/IO slow push or IM PEDIATRIC: Diphenhydramine (Benadryl) 1 mg/kg IV/IO slow push or IM. Maximum dose 50 mg.  Use half dose Haloperidol (2.5 mg IV/IO slow push or IM) for frail, hypotensive, underweight (< 50kg) and elderly (> 65 years) adult patients. I 

--- PAGE 72 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Behavioral Emergencies Version: January 2024 Behavioral Emergencies 
I  For severe agitation that does not respond to the above therapy, administer:  ADULT: Midazolam (Versed) 5 mg IV/IO slow push or 10 mg IM PEDIATRIC: Midazolam (Versed) 0.05 mg/kg IV/IO slow push or 0.1 mg/kg IN/IM.  Maximum dose: 2.5 mg IV/IO, 5 mg IN/IM Use half dose Midazolam (2.5 mg IV/IO or 5 mg IM) for frail, hypotensive, underweight (< 50kg) and elderly (> 65 years) adult patients. Do not mix Haloperidol and Midazolam in the same syringe. I P Only if the patient is severely agitated with imminent risk of harm to self or others, consider:  ADULT: Ketamine (Ketalar) 4 mg/kg IM Be prepared to manage airway and support ventilation as needed.  P MC If unable to safely restrain or transport the patient, contact Medical Control for guidance.   MC  PEARLS • Mild agitation = anxious, apprehensive demeanor but non-aggressive.  • Moderate agitation = pulling at tubes/catheters or aggressive behavior without violence.  • Severe agitation = overt combativeness, violence or self-harm / immediate danger to self or staff.   • “Persons who lack decision-making capacity are assessed and treated with implied consent. EMS practitioners must maintain the patient’s dignity to the extent possible, including use of the least restrictive method of restraint that protects the patient, the public, and emergency responders from harm. The use of appropriate de-escalation techniques should take precedence over physical restraint or pharmacologic management whenever possible.” – National Association of EMS Physicians, Clinical Care and Restraint of Agitated or Combative Patients by EMS Practitioners, October 2020.  • * Consider potential medical or traumatic causes of altered mental status. These include head injury, hypoxia, delirium, stroke, seizure, toxic ingestion/overdose, medication reactions, CNS infection, hyperthermia, and endocrine emergencies such as hypoglycemia and thyrotoxicosis.   • ** De-escalation guidelines:  o Remain calm and friendly. Be aware of your emotions.  o Be mindful of body language. Allow space and assume a non-threatening posture.  o Position yourself between the patient and exit. o Maintain a safe distance.  o Ideally, one provider should establish rapport and communicate with the patient.  

--- PAGE 73 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Behavioral Emergencies Version: January 2024 Behavioral Emergencies 
o Maintain a soothing tone of voice.  o Listen to the patient’s concerns.  o Empathize and use positive feedback.  o Be reassuring but do not reinforce delusional beliefs.  o Provide clear and consistent direction – be flexible and adaptive to the patient’s needs.  o Be patient and willing to slow down when clinically appropriate.  o Calmly set boundaries of acceptable behavior.  o Make every attempt to not aggravate or worsen existing injuries or medical conditions.   • Never place the patient prone or in any position which compromises breathing, circulation or constricts the neck or chest.  • If the patient has decision making capacity and does not wish to be treated or transported, documentation should include a descriptions of the patient’s mental status and the rationale for obtaining a refusal.  • Consider empiric use of high-flow oxygen by mask if unable to monitor SpO2 due to agitated behavior.  • If law-enforcement restraints have been utilized (for example handcuffs or flex-cuffs), a law enforcement officer should accompany the patient. Consider exchanging law enforcement restraints for EMS-sanctioned restraints.  • Patients in law enforcement custody (including emergency custody orders) or under arrest must have a law enforcement officer present at all times.  • This protocol is approved for use only with patients exhibiting signs and/or symptoms of psychiatric, medical, or traumatic emergencies and agitated, aggressive or combative behavior which poses a significant risk of harm to themselves or others. Use of chemical restraint or sedating medications solely to facilitate an arrest by law enforcement is prohibited. 

--- PAGE 74 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 75 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Hemorrhage Control Version: March 2024 Hemorrhage Control 
CRITERIA • Any patient with uncontrolled or profuse external bleeding. • For general management of injured patients, refer to Trauma protocol. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Head   Apply direct pressure to the injury if there is no depressed skull fracture. If direct pressure is ineffective, hemostatic dressing may be applied. Follow manufacturer’s recommendations. Do not place over or near eyes, nose, or mouth. EMR EMR Neck Apply occlusive dressing and direct pressure. Do not pack the wound. EMR EMR Extremity Apply direct pressure, pack with roller gauze (use hemostatic dressing if available), and pressure dressing. If direct pressure/pressure dressing is ineffective or impractical:  • Apply commercial tourniquet 2-3 inches above the wound, not over a joint. Apply circumferential pressure by a method recommended by the manufacturer. Tighten until distal pulse is no longer palpable. Continually reassess.  • If hemorrhage is not controlled – Apply second tourniquet proximal to initial tourniquet leaving no space in between tourniquets.  • If tourniquet(s) are not controlling bleeding continuously maintain direct pressure to wound over packing. EMR 
EMR Junctional injury (Axilla or femoral)  Pack dressing with roller gauze (use hemostatic dressing if available) tightly into wound and directly onto the source of bleeding. More than one gauze may be required to stem blood flow. Hemostatic dressing may be re-packed or adjusted in the wound to ensure proper placement. Hold pressure for at least 3 minutes. Secure dressing for transport. EMR EMR Thoracoabdominal Injury  Apply direct pressure. Do not pack thoracoabdominal wounds. Cover sucking chest wounds with a vented or three-sided occlusive dressing or chest seal. EMR EMR Assess pelvic stability.  If unstable and pelvic hemorrhage is suspected, apply pelvic binder, either commercial or improvised. EMR EMR Monitor airway and breathing. Reassess bleeding after treatments performed.  EMR  

--- PAGE 76 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Hemorrhage Control Version: March 2024 Hemorrhage Control 
PEARLS • Hemodialysis access sites may result in life threatening hemorrhage. Direct pressure/pressure dressing should be used first; followed by tourniquet in the setting of life-threatening hemorrhage. • Ensure date/time/location of placement is written on tourniquet. • Do not release tourniquet once applied.  • If a tourniquet is placed, an alert patient may require analgesia to manage tourniquet-associated discomfort. See Pain Control protocol.  • If extremity wound is not accessible, a tourniquet may be placed high on the extremity. Follow manufacturer’s recommendations. 

--- PAGE 77 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Pain Control Version: January 2024 Pain Control 
CRITERIA • Any patient with discomfort/pain caused by injury or illness.  • Ensure the patient is not hypotensive or at significant risk of hypotension.  o Infants 0 – 12 months: SBP greater than 70 mmHg o Children 1 – 10 years: SBP greater than 80 mmHg o Children and adults over 10 years: SBP greater than 100 PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Assess baseline pain level using scale below. See Pearls.  EMR EMT Assess and monitor blood pressure. Ensure patient is not hypotensive. See Criteria. EMT A Consider treatment for nausea prior to administering an opiate:  ADULT: Ondansetron (Zofran) 4 mg IV/IO slow push, IM, or PO PEDIATRIC [> 1 year]: Ondansetron 0.15 mg/kg IV/IO slow push, IM or PO Maximum dose: 4 mg A A For mild to moderate pain (2 - 5), consider:  ADULT: Ketoralac (Toradol) 15 mg IV/IO or 30 mg IM A 
[A] For moderate to severe pain (6 – 10), consider:  ADULT: Fentanyl (Sublimaze) 25 – 50 mcg IV/IO over 2 minutes or IN/IM  Maximum total dose: 100 mcg PEDIATRIC: Fentanyl (Sublimaze) 0.5 mcg/kg IV/IO over 2 minutes or 1 mcg/kg IN/IM  Maximum dose: 25 mcg, Maximum total dose: 100 mcg OR ADULT: Morphine Sulfate 2.5 – 5 mg IV/IO over 2 minutes or IM Maximum total dose: 10 mg PEDIATRIC: Morphine Sulfate 0.1 mg/kg IV/IO over 2 minutes or IM Maximum dose: 2.5 mg, Maximum total dose: 10 mg May repeat dose as needed every 10 – 15 minutes titrated to pain relief.   Use lower opiate doses (25 mcg Fentanyl or 2.5 mg Morphine) for frail, low weight (<50 kg), opiate naïve, or elderly (> 65 yr) adult patients.  [A] 

--- PAGE 78 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Pain Control Version: January 2024 Pain Control 
MC If unable to adequately control pain or safely and humanely extricate/transport a stable patient, contact medical control for guidance.   MC    
                       


--- PAGE 79 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Pain Control Version: January 2024 Pain Control 
PEARLS • Administer Narcan (Naloxone) respiratory depression occurs. Refer to Overdose / Poisoning / Toxic Ingestions protocol. • Both the Wong-Baker (FACES) chart and FLACC scale can be used to assess pain in non-verbal patients including infants and children.  • Even at therapeutic doses, opiates may cause respiratory/CNS depression, bradycardia and/or hypotension. Monitor vitals closely following any administration.  • Associated factors which may affect hemodynamics and/or respiratory sufficiency including trauma, intoxication or illness must be considered when determining whether to administer opiates for pain control and, if so, at what dose.  • The goal of analgesia is not to completely alleviate pain, but to reduce pain to a manageable level which allows for safe and humane treatment and transport.  • Consider non-pharmacologic options such as reassurance, distraction, positioning, splinting and/or cold therapy when drug therapies are either contraindicated or as an adjunct to drug therapy. 

--- PAGE 80 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 81 ---
Spinal Immobilization/Clearance   
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Spinal Immobilization/Clearance Version: March 2024  CRITERIA • Blunt trauma and distracting injury • Altered mental status or suspected intoxication with possible spinal injury • Neurological complaint associated with trauma (numbness or weakness present) • Trauma patients with spinal pain, tenderness, or deformity • High energy mechanism of injury with the patient unable to communicate • Any clinical suspicious of injury • Age greater than or equal to 18 years  PROTOCOL   EMR Follow General - Universal Patient Care/Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR Spinal Immobilization      EMR • Explain the spinal immobilization procedure to the patient • Assess pulses, sensation and movement, before and after the spinal immobilization procedure • Apply appropriate sized C-collar or equivalent to the patient while maintaining manual stabilization of the C-spine • If indicated, place the patient on a long spine board and secure to the board • Secure torso and legs with securing straps • Secure head to long spine board • Place immobilized patient supine on ambulance stretcher for transport and secure board from movement on the stretcher • Documentation of all assessments and findings whether selecting to immobilize the spine or not shall be recorded on the PCR.      EMR Spinal Clearance    EMR • Neurological examination is normal, no focal deficits o Patient denies midline spine or neck pain o Absence of spinal or neck tenderness, no deformity on palpation/step offs o Absence of spine or neck tenderness with Range of Motion (ROM) • No significant Mechanism of Injury (MOI)    EMR   EMR • Patient is Alert, Awake & Oriented to Person, Place, Time & Event • No language barrier • Patient is a reliable historian • No intoxication or provider suspiscion of intoxication by drugs or alcohol • No distracting injury   EMR 

--- PAGE 82 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Etomidate (Amidate) Version: March 2024  Spinal Immobilization/Clearance 
PEARLS:  • Any time the EMS provider is unsure whether spinal immobilization is appropriate or not, the EMS provider should consult with online Medical Control to determine appropriate therapy. • The long spine board should be used as an extrication device and may not be required for all patients. • The long spine board is beneficial for providing a firm surface to perform CPR on. • Utilization of the long spine board should take into consideration the risks versus the benefits for specific patient care and should be documented on the PCR. • Patients who are ambulatory at the scene of blunt trauma generally do not require spinal immobilization, however careful assessment and consideration must be evaluated. • Whether or not a long spinal board is utilized, spinal precautions are still very important in patients at risk for spinal injury. Adequate spinal precautions may be achieved by placement of a C-collar (or similar device) and securing the patient firmly to the ambulance stretcher, ensuring minimal movement. • Self-extrication of patients from vehicles involved in motor vehicle accidents may best be achieved with guidance by the EMS provider. This may, in some cases, lessen the amount of movement that may occur to the patient during an extrication when the patient is not entrapped. • Spinal immobilization may be achieved by multiple appropriate methods. Some patients, due to size or age may not be able to be immobilized by traditional spinal immobilization procedures. 

--- PAGE 83 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Trauma Version: January 2024 Trauma 
CRITERIA • Any patient who has experienced blunt or penetrating traumatic injury.  PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Control major bleeding. Refer to Hemorrhage Control protocol.  EMR EMR Consider spinal motion restriction. Refer to Spinal Motion Restriction procedure. EMR EMR If shock or potential for shock is present, keep the patient warm.  EMR EMR Immobilize, secure in place, and do not remove any impaled object unless impeding CPR. EMR EMR Acutely deformed /dislocated extremities:  • Assess distal perfusion. Contact Medical Control for direction if distal pulse is absent.  • Splint or immobilize suspected long bone fractures. • Assess distal perfusion before and after splinting. EMR EMR Complete amputation of any part:  • Wrap the amputated part in a dry, sterile dressing  • Place the part in a dry, sealed plastic bag • Place the plastic bag with the part in an ice water filled container  • Mark the container with date, patient name, and name of the part EMR EMT Transport all patients with unmanageable/uncontrolled airway or uncontrolled hemorrhage to the closest emergency department.  EMT EMT Manage airway by the least invasive means possible.  EMT A Consider pain management/analgesia. Refer to Pain Control protocol. A A If hypovolemia is suspected, consider:  ADULT: 0.9% Sodium chloride up to 1 L IV/IO in 250-500 mL boluses  PEDIATRIC: 0.9% Sodium chloride 20 mL/kg IV/IO.  Repeat as needed to maintain adequate perfusion, up to 60 mL/kg total.  If bleeding is suspected (internal or external), IV fluids should be used judiciously to maintain adequate perfusion and normal mentation (SBP 80-90). A 

--- PAGE 84 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Trauma Version: January 2024 Trauma 
I If considering intubation, assess Shock Index (Heart Rate / Systolic Blood Pressure).* If Shock Index is greater than 1, consider resuscitation prior to intubation.  Refer to Endotracheal Intubation procedure. I I  Tension pneumothorax: Decompress the affected side(s).  Refer to Chest Decompression procedure. I  I Traumatic Cardiac Arrest: Refer to Cardiac Arrest: Traumatic protocol.  I EMT If the patient meets the trauma triage criteria according to Administrative Policy – Trauma Field Triage, transport immediately to a Level 1 or Level II Trauma Center.  Goal scene time: Less than 10 minutes. EMT MC Contact Medical Control for guidance and/or optimal destination determination as needed.  MC  PEARLS • *Shock Index = Heart Rate / Systolic Blood Pressure. Higher shock indices correlate with increased risk of post-intubation hypotension and cardiac arrest. Shock Index > 1.0 in an injured patient suggests the need for resuscitation prior to positive-pressure ventilation.  • Do not delay transport to establish IV lines or wait for ALS. • Any patient who is cool/diaphoretic and tachycardic is considered to be in shock until proven otherwise.  • When possible, obtain two large bore IV access sites. • Stable patients with isolated spinal injuries: handle with the utmost care. Rapid transport is not indicated.  • All pregnant patients who have suffered blunt trauma should be encouraged to be evaluated in an emergency department, preferably at a facility with L&D capability for patients >20 weeks gestation. Pregnant patients in the third trimester should be transported with the backboard angled to the left and slightly elevated.   • Vasopressors worsen hemorrhage and are generally not indicated for the management of trauma.  • BLS care is generally preferred in the prehospital management of major trauma. Safe and rapid transport to an appropriate hospital is indicated with ideal scene-time less than 10 minutes. Consider the benefit/risk of performing ALS interventions during transport.  • Consider HEMS if the patient meets one or more of the applicable trauma triage criteria. HEMS is best utilized when the expected level of care exceeds available capabilities AND the patient can be transported by air in a similar or shorter time than the patient could be transported by ground. Be sure to consider the additional time required for rendezvous and patient transfer when considering HEMS.    

--- PAGE 85 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Trauma Version: January 2024 Trauma 
                            Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) [Minimum: 3 Maximum: 15] Eyes: 1. Does not open eyes 2. Opens eyes to pain 3. Opens eyes to voice 4. Opens eyes spontaneously Verbal: 1. No sounds 2. Incomprehensible sounds 3. Inappropriate words 4. Confused, disoriented 5. Oriented Motor: 1. No movement 2. Extension to painful stimuli 3. Flexion to painful stimuli 4. Withdrawal to painful stimuli 5. Localizes painful stimuli 6. Obeys commands Pediatric  Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) [Minimum: 3 Maximum: 15] Eyes: 1. Does not open eyes 2. Opens eyes to pain  3. Opens eyes to voice  4. Opens eyes spontaneously  Verbal: 1. No sounds  2. Incomprehensible sounds  3. Inappropriate words  4. Confused, disoriented  5. Oriented  Motor: 1. No movement  2. Extension to painful stimuli  3. Flexion to painful stimuli  4. Withdrawal to painful stimuli  5. Localizes painful stimuli  6. Obeys commands  

--- PAGE 86 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Trauma Version: January 2024 Trauma 
 


--- PAGE 87 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Burn Injuries Version: January 2024 Burns Injuries 
CRITERIA • Any patient with radiation, chemical, or thermal burns.  PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Safely remove patient from source of the burn. Fully expose the injured area.  Remove constricting items including clothing.  EMR EMR Assess airway and respiratory effort. Refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory Support protocol.  EMR EMT Estimate depth of burns and body surface area involved using the chart provided below and/or estimated by 1% BSA = the area of the patient’s palm.   Only partial thickness (2nd degree) and full thickness (3rd degree) burns are counted towards TBSA.  EMT EMT Apply clean, dry dressings to burns. Prevent loss of body heat. Keep the patient warm.  EMT A Establish IV/IO access on a non-burned extremity, if possible (preferably obtain two sites of access). A A For an adult patient with SBP less than 90 and TBSA greater than 20%, administer:  ADULT: 0.9% Sodium chloride at 500 mL/hr IV/IO  PEDIATRIC, 6 to 12 years old: 0.9% Sodium chloride at 250 mL/hr IV/IO  PEDIATRIC, 5 years old and younger: 0.9% Sodium chloride at 125 mL/hr IV/IO A 
I Consider endotracheal intubation vs immediate transport to the nearest emergency department if any signs of symptoms of airway injury develop:  • Singed facial or nasal hairs • Burns or soot on the face, nose, or mouth  • Hoarse voice or stridor • Carbonaceous sputum • Difficulty breathing / respiratory distress • Hypoxia • Tachypnea  Follow Endotracheal Intubation procedure if proceeding with intubation. Note: Intubation of spontaneously breathing patients without rapid sequence induction (RSI) is generally not recommended. RSI is a Paramedic only skill and not addressed in PEMS regional protocols – refer to agency specific protocols for guidance. Note: Intubation of children under 12 years old is a Paramedic “red dot” skill only. I 

--- PAGE 88 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Burn Injuries Version: January 2024 Burns Injuries 
I For altered mental status, seizures, hypotension, and/or cardiac arrest following exposure to combustion products in an enclosed space or suspected cyanide poisoning, administer (if available): ADULT: Hydroxocobalamin (CYANOKIT) 5 g IV/IO, infuse over 15 minutes  PEDIATRIC: Hydroxocobalamin (CYANOKIT) 70 mg/kg IV/IO, infuse over 15 minutes  To reconstitute for infusion:   Add: 200mL of 0.9% Sodium Chloride to Hydroxocobalamin (CYANOKIT) vial using the transfer spike included in the kit. Fill to the line.   Mix: Repeatedly invert or rock the vial for at least 60 seconds. Do not shake. I 
MC Contact Medical Control if most appropriate transport destination is unclear: Cardiac arrest, impending arrest, or airway compromise à Closest emergency department  Major or multisystem trauma à Trauma Center (Level I or II) None of the above AND any of the following à Consider transport to a Burn Center  • Any full thickness burns • Partial thickness burns > 10 % TBSA • Circumferential burns • Electrical or chemical burns • Inhalation injuries  • Burns to the face, eyes, ears, hands, feet, genitalia, perineum or skin overlying major joints MC  PEARLS • Assess for airway / inhalation injury. Consider early definitive airway management for patients with respiratory distress, hoarse voice or stridor, carbonaceous sputum and/or facial burns. Prompt assessment by a qualified RSI paramedic, when available, is preferred.  • Immediate (pre-hospital) hypotension solely due to burns < 20% TBSA is unlikely. Assess patients with hypotension/AMS in the setting of limited burns for concomitant trauma or other medical conditions (e.g. cardiac emergency or cyanide poisoning).  • Only if necessary (i.e. no other accessible site), obtain IV/IO access through a burned area.  • Utilize reverse triage (i.e. treat pulseless/apneic patients first) in the case of lightning strike with multiple patients. Cardiac arrest is likely to be due to airway obstruction or shockable arrhythmia (VF/VT). • Treat road-rash as a burn injury. Assess closely for concomitant blunt trauma.  • Hydrofluoric Acid (HF) – binds and rapidly reduces serum calcium leading to circulatory collapse. Treat hypotension with 1 g Calcium Chloride IV/IO over 3 minutes. Repeat in 5 minutes as needed.  • Addressing hemodynamic instability, airway compromise and/or major traumatic injuries takes priority over direct transport to a burn center. Do not bypass a trauma center to transport to a burn center if the patient is unstable.   

--- PAGE 89 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Burn Injuries Version: January 2024 Burns Injuries 
 


--- PAGE 90 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 91 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Crush Injuries Version: January 2024 Crush Injuries 
CRITERIA • Any patient with a trapped/crushed extremity or torso for more than 30 minutes.  • Any patient who has experienced a crush injury or prolonged entrapment and is in cardiac arrest or has one or more of the following ECG change suggestive of hyperkalemia:  o Peaked T waves o Prolonged PR segment (>200 ms) o Flattening or loss of P waves o Wide QRS complex  o Ectopic beats o Arrhythmia (e.g. ventricular tachycardia)PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Refer to Trauma, Hemorrhage Control, and Pain Control protocols as needed.  EMR EMT If possible, obtain an ECG prior to and after release of the crushed part.  EMT A Administer (when able, initiate prior to release): ADULT: 0.9% Sodium chloride 1 L IV/IO in 250 – 500 mL boluses  PEDIATRIC: 0.9% Sodium chloride 20 mL/kg IV/IO   A [ A ] Administer (when able, initiate prior to release): ADULT: Continuous Albuterol Sulfate (Proventil) 0.083% solution via nebulizer or BVM PEDIATRIC: Continuous Albuterol Sulfate (Proventil) 0.083% solution via nebulizer or BVM [ A ] [ I ] Administer, preferably via separate lines (when able, initiate prior to release):  ADULT: Sodium bicarbonate 1 mEq/kg IV/IO slow push. Maximum dose 50 mEq.  Followed by 20 mL 0.9% sodium chloride flush. ADULT: Calcium Chloride 1g IV/IO over 3 minutes PEDIATRIC: Sodium bicarbonate 1 mEq/kg IV/IO slow push. Maximum dose 50 mEq.  Followed by 20 mL 0.9% sodium chloride flush. PEDIATRIC: Calcium Chloride 20 mg/kg IV/IO over 3 minutes. Maximum dose 1,000 mg (1g). For persistent ECG changes suggestive of crush syndrome or cardiac arrest, repeat once.  [ I ] I Assess and continuously monitor cardiac rhythm. I EMT Extricate patient from entrapment and transport per Administrative Policy – Trauma Field Triage. EMT MC If it is anticipated the patient will not be able to be promptly and safely extricate, contact Medical Control at a regional trauma center for additional resources.   MC 

--- PAGE 92 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Crush Injuries Version: January 2024 Crush Injuries 
 PEARLS • Crush syndrome involves the release of toxins, particularly large amounts of potassium, from skeletal muscle cells following blunt trauma and prolonged soft tissue ischemia. Prehospital treatment is focused on preventing or treating life-threatening arrhythmia due to hyperkalemia. Crush injuries are not limited to heavy weights applied to extremities for a prolonged time and can occur in a variety of situations such are after prolonged suspension in a harness or following a prolonged time laying on a hard surface.  • Sodium bicarbonate and Calcium Chloride are preferably given via separate IV lines to avoid precipitation into Calcium Carbonate. If separate IV sites cannot be obtained, flush with at least 20 mL saline between drugs.  • Continuous albuterol is given to treat suspected hyperkalemia in the setting of persistent ECG changes.  • IV fluids may worsen bleeding. Use clinical judgement when administering fluids to patients with crush injuries, balancing risk of hemorrhage vs benefit in treating crush syndrome.  • Widened QRS: Adult > 120 ms, Pediatric > 90 ms 

--- PAGE 93 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Drowning and Diving Injuries Version: January 2024 Drowning and Diving Injuries 
CRITERIA • Any patient who has suffered an acute submersion / non-fatal drowning event.  • Any patient with one or more of the following symptoms of decompression injury after breathing compressed air at depth:  o Altered mental status o Seizures o Vision changes o Respiratory distress o Hemoptysis o Chest pain o Headache o Focal neurologic signs o Ataxia o Pain in joints / extremities  PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Remove the patient from the water. Consider spinal motion restriction.  Refer to Spinal Motion Restriction procedure.  EMR EMR Assess airway and ventilation. Refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory Support protocol. EMR EMR Remove wet clothing and dry the skin. Keep the patient warm. EMR EMR If hypothermia and hemodynamically unstable, focus effort on rewarming as well as resuscitation. EMR EMR Diving emergencies: Consider pulmonary barotrauma, decompression sickness, and/or arterial gas embolism. Refer to appropriate protocols as needed.* EMR MC Contact Medical Control for transport destination guidance if decompression injury is suspected. Hyperbaric Centers: Sentara Leigh Hospital ED (Norfolk, VA): 757 261 – 6804 Diver Alert Network: (919 684 – 9111 Do not initiate transport to a hyperbaric center without first confirming availability of the chamber.  MC      

--- PAGE 94 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Drowning and Diving Injuries Version: January 2024 Drowning and Diving Injuries 
PEARLS • Caution: rewarming the extremities before the trunk may lead to vasodilation, resulting in a drop in blood pressure.  • Trauma very commonly occurs along with submersion / drowning. Maintain a high suspicion for blunt trauma, particularly involving the head and spine.  • Patients in cardiac arrest following cold-water submersion have been reported to survive neurologically intact even following prolonged resuscitation. Contact Medical Control for guidance regarding continued on-scene resuscitation vs transport to the closest emergency department.  • Handle patients with hypothermia gently – rough handling may precipitate arrythmias including lethal VF.  • Pulmonary edema may develop hours after a submersion event. Transport of all patients who have experienced nonfatal drowning for assessment and observation is encouraged.  • * Rapid ascent after breathing compressed air at depth may lead to barotrauma including injury to the lungs (pneumothorax). Evaluate and treat as you would any other trauma patient, beginning with a complete head-to-toe assessment.  • * Rapid ascent may also lead to the formation of gas bubbles in the soft tissues, causing pain (i.e. “the bends”). These bubbles may also form within the vasculature (arterial gas emboli) which can present as a variety of emergencies including seizure, stroke, MI or PE. Initial treatment is centered on identification, stabilization, and transport to an appropriate facility. 

--- PAGE 95 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Electrical Injuries Version: January 2024 Electrical Injuries 
I Consider endotracheal intubation vs immediate transport to the nearest emergency department if any signs of symptoms of airway injury develop:  • Singed facial or nasal hairs • Burns or soot on the face, nose, or mouth  • Hoarse voice or stridor • Carbonaceous sputum • Difficulty breathing / respiratory distress • Hypoxia • Tachypnea  Follow Endotracheal Intubation procedure if proceeding with intubation. Note: Intubation of spontaneously breathing patients without rapid sequence induction (RSI) is generally not recommended. RSI is not addressed in regional protocols – refer to agency specific protocols for guidance. Note: Intubation of children under 12 years old is a Paramedic “red dot” skill only. I 
MC Contact Medical Control if most appropriate transport destination is unclear: Cardiac arrest, impending arrest, or airway compromise à Closest emergency department  Major or multisystem trauma à Trauma Center (Level I or II) None of the above AND any of the following à Consider transport to a Burn Center  • Any full thickness burns • Partial thickness burns > 10 % TBSA • Circumferential burns • Electrical or chemical burns • Inhalation injuries  Burns to the face, eyes, ears, hands, feet, genitalia, perineum or skin overlying major joints MC        

--- PAGE 96 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Electrical Injuries Version: January 2024 Electrical Injuries 
CRITERIA Any patient exhibiting signs of symptoms of electrical contact injury or who may have been struck by lightning. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Ensure scene safety and that the patient is not energized. Do not become a second victim.  Fully expose the injured area. Remove constricting items including clothing.  EMR EMR If multiple patients are present, patients in cardiac arrest should be treated first.  EMR EMR Assess airway and respiratory effort. Refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure. Manage airway by the least invasive means necessary.  EMR EMT Estimate depth of burns and body surface area involved using the chart provided below and/or estimated by 1% BSA = the area of the patient’s palm.  Only partial thickness (2nd degree) and full thickness (3rd degree) burns are counted towards TBSA. EMT EMT Apply clean, dry dressings to burns. Prevent loss of body heat. Keep the patient warm. EMT EMT Obtain and transmit a 12-Lead ECG. EMT A Establish IV/IO access on a non-burned extremity, if possible (preferably obtain two sites of access). A A For an adult patient with SBP less than 90 and TBSA greater than 20%, administer:  ADULT: 0.9% Sodium chloride at 500 mL/hr IV/IO  PEDIATRIC, 6 to 12 years old: 0.9% Sodium chloride at 250 mL/hr IV/IO  PEDIATRIC, 5 years old and younger: 0.9% Sodium chloride at 125 mL/hr IV/IO A I Assess and continuously monitor cardiac rhythm.  I 

--- PAGE 97 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Electrical Injuries Version: January 2024 Electrical Injuries 
PEARLS •  Assess for airway / inhalation injury. Consider early definitive airway management for patients with respiratory distress, hoarse voice or stridor, carbonaceous sputum and/or facial burns. Prompt assessment by a qualified RSI paramedic, when available, is preferred.  • Immediate (pre-hospital) hypotension solely due to burns < 20% TBSA is unlikely. Assess patients with hypotension/AMS in the setting of limited burns for concomitant trauma or other medical conditions (e.g. cardiac emergency or cyanide poisoning).  • Only if necessary (i.e. no other accessible site), obtain IV/IO access through a burned area.  • Utilize reverse triage (i.e. treat pulseless/apneic patients first) in the case of lightning strike with multiple patients. Cardiac arrest is likely to be due to airway obstruction or shockable arrhythmia (VF/VT). • Addressing hemodynamic instability, airway compromise and/or major traumatic injuries takes priority over direct transport to a burn center. Do not bypass a trauma center to transport to a burn center if the patient is unstable.    

--- PAGE 98 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 99 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Allergic Reaction / Anaphylaxis Version: January 2024 Allergic Reaction / Anaphylaxis 
CRITERIA • Any patient with signs or symptoms of an acute allergic reaction (mild - moderate). • Any patient with signs or symptoms of an anaphylactic reaction (severe). o Two or more of the following that occur rapidly after exposure to a likely allergen:  § Involvement of the skin or mucosal tissue  § Respiratory distress § Hypotension of syncope § Persistent gastrointestinal symptoms (abdominal cramps, diarrhea, vomiting) o OR hypotension after exposure to a known allergen for the patient. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMT Remove stinger if present. Do not squeeze stinger. Scrape it away with a flat surface.  EMT  Acute Allergic Reaction (non-Anaphylaxis)  A Administer:  ADULT: Diphenhydramine (Benadryl) 50 mg IV/IO slow push or IM PEDIATRIC: Diphenhydramine (Benadryl) 1 mg/kg IV/IO slow push or IM.  Maximum dose: 50 mg. A A If wheezing is present, administer: ADULT: Albuterol sulfate (Proventil) 3 mL of 0.083% solution, nebulized PEDIATRIC: Albuterol sulfate (Proventil) 3 mL of 0.083% solution, nebulized Repeat as needed for wheezing.  A A If wheezing is present, administer: ADULT: Ipratropium bromide (Atrovent) 3 mL of 0.02% solution, nebulized, once. PEDIATRIC: Ipratropium bromide (Atrovent) 3 mL of 0.02% solution, nebulized, once. A A Consider: ADULT: Methylprednisolone Succinate (Solu-Medrol) 125 mg slow IV push. PEDIATRIC: Methylprednisolone Succinate (Solu-Medrol) 2 mg/kg slow IV push.  Maximum dose 125mg. A 

--- PAGE 100 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Allergic Reaction / Anaphylaxis Version: January 2024 Allergic Reaction / Anaphylaxis 
 Anaphylaxis  EMT Administer: ADULT: Epinephrine autoinjector or 0.3 mg [1 mg/mL] IM PEDIATRIC (< 30 kg): Pediatric Epinephrine autoinjector or 0.15 mg [1 mg/mL] IM PEDIATRIC (> 30 kg): Epinephrine autoinjector or 0.3 mg [1 mg/mL] IM  EMT must use either dose-specific clearly marked or color-coded syringe. Repeat every 5-15 minutes for up to 3 injections as needed. EMT A Obtain IV/IO access.  A A If the patient is hypotensive, administer:  ADULT: 0.9% Sodium chloride up to 1 L IV/IO in 250 – 500 mL boluses.  PEDIATRIC: 0.9% Sodium chloride 20 mL/kg IV/IO.  Repeat as needed to maintain adequate perfusion, up to 60 mL/kg total. A A Administer:  ADULT: Diphenhydramine (Benadryl) 50 mg IV/IO slow push or IM PEDIATRIC: Diphenhydramine (Benadryl) 1 mg/kg IV/IO slow push or IM.  Maximum dose: 50 mg. A A If wheezing is present, administer: ADULT: Albuterol sulfate (Proventil) 3 mL of 0.083% solution, nebulized PEDIATRIC: Albuterol sulfate (Proventil) 3 mL of 0.083% solution, nebulized May repeat as needed.  A A If wheezing is present, administer: ADULT: Ipratropium bromide (Atrovent) 3 mL of 0.02% solution, nebulized, once. PEDIATRIC: Ipratropium bromide (Atrovent) 3 mL of 0.02% solution, nebulized, once. A A Administer:  ADULT: Methylprednisolone succinate (Solu-Medrol) 125 mg IV/IO slow push PEDIATRIC: Methylprednisolone succinate (Solu-Medrol) 2 mg/kg IV/IO slow push Maximum dose: 125 mg A 

--- PAGE 101 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Allergic Reaction / Anaphylaxis Version: January 2024 Allergic Reaction / Anaphylaxis 
I Maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP) above 65 mmHg. If the patient has not responded to repeat IM Epinephrine injections, consider: ADULT: Epinephrine infusion 2 – 10 mcg/min IV/IO  (Add 1 mg of Epinephrine [1mg/mL] to 100 mL of 0.9% Sodium chloride = 10 mcg/mL) I [ I ] Maintain age adjusted SBP. If the patient has not responded to repeat IM Epinephrine injections, consider:  PEDIATRIC: Epinephrine 0.1  - 1 mcg/kg/min IV/IO infusion. Max dose: 10 mcg/min.  Under 1 year old: Titrate to SBP > 70 mmHg Over 1 year old: Titrate to SBP > 90 mmHg (Add 1 mg of Epinephrine [1mg/mL] to 100 mL of 0.9% Sodium chloride = 10 mcg/mL) Note: Infusion via IV pump is preferred is available. Monitor closely for signs of extravasation. [ I ] P To maintain MAP > 65 until a vasopressor infusion is prepared, consider:  ADULT: Push dose Epinephrine 5-10 mcg IV/IO every 2-3 minutes  (Add 100 mcg Epinephrine (1mL of 0.1 mg/mL) to 9mL of 0.9% Normal Saline = 10 mcg / mL) P MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  MC  PEARLS • Remove, decontaminate, or separate the patient from the allergic trigger whenever possible.  • If the patient is experiencing anaphylaxis with hemodynamic instability or respiratory distress, administer IM epinephrine before any other medications. • EMTs may administer intramuscular epinephrine for anaphylaxis via color-coded or clearly marked syringe only.  • Monitor patients closely following the administration of Epinephrine, particularly patients with significant cardiopulmonary comorbidities. Obtain an ECG immediately for any patient who develops chest discomfort or other signs of cardiac ischemia following the administration of IM Epinephrine or during an Epinephrine infusion.  • Administer Epinephrine via infusion through the largest, most proximal IV access site that can be obtained, preferably antecubital fossa. Monitor closely for signs of extravasation including changes in skin color, pain, swelling, numbness, or tingling. Stop the infusion immediately if extravasation is suspected and resume, if needed, on the contralateral site. • Close monitoring during fluid administration should include frequent reassessment of respiratory effort, lung sounds and edema. 

--- PAGE 102 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 103 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Symptomatic Bradycardia Version: October 2023 Bradycardia 
CRITERIA Any patient with a sustained ventricular rate less than 60 beats per minute AND one or more of the following signs or symptoms despite adequate oxygenation and ventilation (ie UNSTABLE Bradycardia): • Hypotension (age based) • Signs of shock • Altered mental status • Pulmonary Edema • Dyspnea • Chest pain Patients with asymptomatic/STABLE bradycardia are excluded. Monitor closely for any change in status.  Note: For neonates (less than 28 days of age), refer to Neonatal Resuscitation protocol. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Ensure adequate oxygenation. Refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure. EMR EMR Children/Infants ONLY: If unconscious and hypotensive, with HR less than 60, begin chest compressions. Follow Pediatric Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) procedure. If pulselessness develops, follow Cardiac Arrest: Asystole / PEA protocol. EMR EMR Identify and treat potentially reversible causes. See Pearls below. EMR EMT Obtain and transmit a 12-Lead ECG. EMT A Obtain IV/IO access. A A Children/Infants ONLY: If unconscious and hypotensive, with HR less than 60, administer: PEDIATRIC: Epinephrine 0.01 mg/kg IV/IO [0.1 mg/mL] every 3 – 5 minutes, as needed.  A I Assess and continuously monitor cardiac rhythm. I I Consider:  ADULT: Atropine sulfate 1 mg IV/IO  PEDIATRIC: Atropine sulfate 0.02 mg/kg IV/IO. Minimum dose: 0.1mg, Maximum dose: 0.5 mg May repeat once after 5 minutes, if needed. I 

--- PAGE 104 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Symptomatic Bradycardia Version: January 2024 Symptomatic Bradycardia 
I If hypotensive or in shock, initiate transcutaneous pacing. Follow Transcutaneous Pacing procedure. I I Maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP) above 65 mmHg. If pacing is ineffective, administer:  ADULT: Epinephrine infusion 2 – 10 mcg/min IV/IO  (Add 1 mg of Epinephrine [1mg/mL] to 100 mL of 0.9% Sodium chloride = 10 mcg/mL) I [ I ] Maintain age adjusted SBP. If pacing is ineffective, administer: PEDIATRIC: Epinephrine 0.1  - 1 mcg/kg/min IV/IO infusion. Max dose: 10 mcg/min.  Under 1 year old: Titrate to SBP > 70 mmHg Over 1 year old: Titrate to SBP > 90 mmHg (Add 1 mg of Epinephrine [1mg/mL] to 100 mL of 0.9% Sodium chloride = 10 mcg/mL) Note: Infusion via IV pump is preferred is available. Monitor closely for signs of extravasation. [ I ] P To maintain MAP > 65 until a vasopressor infusion is prepared, consider:  ADULT: Push dose Epinephrine 5-10 mcg IV/IO every 2-3 minutes  (Add 100 mcg Epinephrine (1mL of 0.1 mg/mL) to 9mL of 0.9% Normal Saline = 10 mcg / mL) P MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  Consider contacting Medical Control at a pediatric specialty center (VCU CHoR or CHKD) for children and infants with symptomatic bradycardia.  MC  Children’s Hospital of the King’s Daughters, COR: (757) 668 – 8000  VCU Children’s Hospital of Richmond, Communications Room: (804) 828 – 3989  PEARLS • Close monitoring during fluid administration including frequent reassessment of respiratory effort, lung sounds, and edema.  • Do not delay pacing to obtain IV/IO access if the patient is hemodynamically unstable.  • Refer to manufacturer recommendations for device specific optimal pad placement.  • Administer vasopressors through the largest, most proximal IV site available (AC or higher preferable) or IO. Verify patency prior to initiating infusion and monitor closely for extravasation.     

--- PAGE 105 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Symptomatic Bradycardia Version: January 2024 Symptomatic Bradycardia 
Compressions:  • Push hard and fast: rate 100 – 120 bpm. Allow complete chest recoil.  • Minimize interruptions in chest compressions.  • Change compressors every 2 minutes or sooner if fatigued • Give continuous compressions with advanced airway  • Use quantitative EtCO2 monitoring with BVM o If EtCO2 is less than 10 mmHg, improve chest compressions  o If sudden increase in EtCO2 is noted (above 30-40 mmHg), check pulse and rhythm for ROSC. Airway: • Hypoxia is the most common cause of pediatric symptomatic bradycardia. Ensure adequate oxygenation. • Use of advanced airways have not been shown to improve outcomes for children with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Focus on high quality BLS airway management.  • Studies to date have not shown a clear improvement in outcomes with SGA vs intubation – do not compromise chest compressions for intubation. • Avoid excessive ventilation. Maximize preload.  • Use EtCO2 to confirm and monitor placement of any advanced airway.  • Continually monitor EtCO2 with target above 10 mmHg during CPR and 35-45 mmHg once ROSC is achieved.  • In post ROSC patients, if EtCO2 falls below 20 mmHg or signal is lost, immediately reassess pulses and airway. Reversible causes:  • Identify and treat per appropriate protocol and scope of practice: o Hypoxia o Hyperkalemia or Hypokalemia  o Hyperthermia or Hypothermia o Hypovolemia o Hydrogen ion (acidosis) o Hyperglycemia or Hypoglycemia o Tension pneumothorax/hemothorax  o Tamponade (Cardiac) o Thrombosis (Cardiac, Pulmonary) o Toxins o Trauma o Tablets (Overdose) 

--- PAGE 106 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 107 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Chest Pain (Cardiac) Version: March 2024 Chest Pain (Cardiac) 
CRITERIA • Any patient reporting chest pain or discomfort • Any patient reporting symptoms which are unexplained and consistent with an atypical presentation of cardiac ischemia, such as:  o Abdominal pain  o Nausea / vomiting  o Syncope  o Dyspnea  o Back pain o Neck or jaw pain / discomfort  o Arm pain / discomfort PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Maintain SpO2 94 – 98%. Refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory Support protocol. EMR EMR If hypotensive, refer to Hypotension and Shock protocol. EMR EMT Obtain and transmit 12 – Lead ECG within 5 minutes of patient contact. EMT EMT If 12-Lead ECG reads “STEMI” or “ACUTE MI”, initiate transport to the nearest PCI capable hospital.  Notify the receiving facility of a “Pre-Hospital STEMI Alert.”*  Refer to PEMS Administrative Policy: STEMI Field Triage. EMT EMT Administer:  ADULT: Aspirin 324 mg PO chewed EMT EMT If systolic blood pressure remains above 100 mmHg and MAP ≥ 65, consider:  ADULT: Nitroglycerine 0.4 mg SL.  May repeat every 5 minutes as needed for relief of chest pain, up to three doses. EMT I Monitor cardiac rhythm. Refer to Tachyarrhythmias or Bradycardia protocol, as needed. I I Consider analgesia. Refer to Pain Control protocol. I MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  If 12-Lead ECG is indeterminate or there is high suspicion for cardiac ischemia, obtain serial ECGs at 10-minute intervals and contact Medical Control for guidance. MC    

--- PAGE 108 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Chest Pain (Cardiac) Version: March 2024 Chest Pain (Cardiac) 
PEARLS • Intermediate and Paramedic providers may interpret a 12-Lead ECG as STEMI if diagnostic criteria is met:  o Symptoms consistent with an acute coronary syndrome or myocardial ischemia AND o ≥ 1 mm ST segment elevation in two or more contiguous leads • *Contact the receiving facility via COR and provide notification of a “Pre-Hospital STEMI Alert” as well as the patient’s name and date of birth to facilitate rapid registration. Do not provide patient identifiers over the HEAR. • Consider right-sided 12-Lead or 15-Lead ECG.  • Minimize scene time. Goal ≤ 15 minutes.  • If transport to a PCI capable hospital will not be possible within 30 minutes, consider HEMS.   • With prompt response, initial ECGs often do not show ischemia. When there is high suspicion for cardiac ischemia, obtain serial ECGs to assess symptoms with recent onset (< 1 hour). • Do not administer Nitroglycerine (Nitrostat) to patients who have taken any long-acting nitrate-based medications within the past 48 hours. These include: Sildenafil (Viagra / Revatio), Vardenafil (Levitra) and Tadalafil (Cialis). Record 12-Lead ECG prior to nitroglycerine administration. • Any unstable patient not expected to survive transport to a PCI capable hospital should be transported immediately to the nearest Emergency Department.   

--- PAGE 109 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Hypertension Version: March 2024 Hypertension 
CRITERIA • Any patient with systolic blood pressure greater than 240 mmHg and/or diastolic greater than 120 mmHg. • Any patient with chronic essential hypertension and sudden, unexplained, significant increase in blood pressure. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR If stroke is suspected, refer to Stroke / TIA protocol. EMR EMR If the patient is experiencing chest pain / discomfort, or symptoms consistent with an acute coronary syndrome, refer to Chest Pain (Cardiac) protocol.  EMR EMR If the patient is experiencing respiratory distress, refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure and Respiratory Distress protocol.  EMR EMR Check blood glucose level. Refer to Hyperglycemia / Hypoglycemia protocol. EMR MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  MC  PEARLS • Generally, prehospital treatment of hypertension is unnecessary. Monitor for deterioration in patient condition. • Patients with extremely high blood pressure may experience epistaxis (nose bleeding). If present, manage with direct pressure with the patient leaning forward.  

--- PAGE 110 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 111 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Hypoglycemia / Hyperglycemia Version: January 2024 Hypoglycemia / Hyperglycemia 
CRITERIA • Any patient with symptomatic hyperglycemia (blood glucose greater than 300 mg/dL) • Any infant, child, or adult with symptomatic hypoglycemia (blood glucose less than 60 mg/dL) • Any newborn (less than 72 hours) with symptomatic hypoglycemia (blood glucose less than 40 mg/dL) PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR  Hypoglycemia  EMT If the patient is conscious, and able to swallow, administer:  ADULT: Oral glucose, 1 tube, PO PEDIATRIC (> 1 year): Oral glucose, 1 tube, PO Repeat dose in 5 minutes if no response. EMT A Administer:  ADULT: Dextrose 10% 125 mL (12.5 g) IV/IO  PEDIATRIC: Dextrose 10% 5 mL/kg IV/IO. Maximum dose 125 mL (12.5 g) Repeat dose in 5 minutes if no response. A A If unable to obtain IV/IO access, administer*: ADULT: Glucagon 1 mg IM PEDIATRIC (< 25 kg): Glucagon 0.2 mg/kg IM. Maximum dose 1 mg. Repeat dose in 10 minutes if no response. A  Hyperglycemia  A Consider:  ADULT: 0.9% Sodium chloride up to 1 L IV/IO in 250 – 500 mL boluses  PEDIATRIC: 0.9% Sodium chloride 20 mL/kg IV/IO Repeat as needed to maintain adequate perfusion, up to 60 mL/kg total. A   

--- PAGE 112 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Hypoglycemia / Hyperglycemia Version: January 2024 Hypoglycemia / Hyperglycemia 
PEARLS •  Blood glucose must be assessed for any patient with altered mental status.  • *Response to Glucagon requires adequate stores of glycogen in the liver. Patients with liver disease, malnourishment, and some newborns/children with congenital metabolic disease may not adequately respond. If IV access cannot be obtained and there is no response to Glucagon within 5-10 minutes (or if emergent therapy is required), obtain IO access and administer Dextrose as above.   • Asymptomatic hyperglycemia does not require prehospital intervention. Use caution when administering IV fluids to patients with congestive heart failure, ESRD or pulmonary edema.  • The risk of recurrent hypoglycemia following appropriate treatment is higher in the following situations:  o No clear explanation for hypoglycemia. o Nausea or vomiting that prevents adequate PO intake. o Signs/symptoms of acute illness such as infection or ACS. o Use of long-acting oral anti-hyperglycemic medications such as Sulfonylureas and SGLT2 inhibitors. o The patient is unaware of symptoms when hypoglycemic or the patient will be left alone. o Persistent vital sign abnormalities or altered mental status.  
 


--- PAGE 113 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Hypotension and Shock Version: January 2024 Hypotension and Shock 
CRITERIA • Under 1 year of age: SBP less than 70 mmHg or MAP less than 55 mmHg • Over 1 year of age: SBP less than 90 mmHg or MAP less than 65 mmHg • No evidence of acute traumatic injury (Refer to Trauma protocol for patients with injuries) • Signs and/or symptoms of inadequate perfusion, such as:  o Altered mental status o Diaphoresis  o Chest pain or discomfort o Syncope o Dyspnea o Pulmonary edema  PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Obtain relevant history and perform a focused assessment to determine the potential cause.*  EMR EMR Maintain SpO2 94 – 98%. Refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure.  EMR EMT Obtain and transmit a 12-Lead ECG. EMT A Obtain IV/IO access. Administer:**  ADULT: 0.9% Sodium chloride up to 1 L IV/IO in 250 – 500 mL boluses  PEDIATRIC: 0.9% Sodium chloride 20 mL/kg IV/IO Repeat as needed to maintain adequate perfusion, up to 60 mL/kg total. A I Assess and continuously monitor cardiac rhythm.  Refer to Tachyarrhythmias and Symptomatic Bradycardia protocols as needed.  I I Maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP) above 65 mmHg. Consider:  ADULT: Norepinephrine (Levophed) infusion 5 – 20 mcg/min IV/IO (Add 4 mg of Norepinephrine to 250 mL 0.9% Sodium chloride = 16 mcg/mL) OR ADULT: Epinephrine infusion 2 – 10 mcg/min IV/IO  (Add 1 mg of Epinephrine [1mg/mL] to 100 mL of 0.9% Sodium chloride = 10 mcg/mL) I 

--- PAGE 114 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Hypotension and Shock Version: January 2024 Hypotension and Shock 
[ I ] Maintain age adjusted SBP. Consider:  PEDIATRIC: Epinephrine 0.1  - 1 mcg/kg/min IV/IO infusion. Max dose: 10 mcg/min.  Under 1 year old: Titrate to SBP > 70 mmHg Over 1 year old: Titrate to SBP > 90 mmHg (Add 1 mg of Epinephrine [1mg/mL] to 100 mL of 0.9% Sodium chloride = 10 mcg/mL) Note: Infusion via IV pump is preferred if available. Monitor closely for signs of extravasation. [ I ] P To maintain MAP > 65 mmHg until a vasopressor infusion is prepared, consider:  ADULT: Push dose Epinephrine 5-10 mcg IV/IO every 2-3 minutes  (Add 100 mcg Epinephrine (1mL of 0.1 mg/mL) to 9mL of 0.9% Normal Saline = 10 mcg / mL) P MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  MC  PEARLS • This protocol is not intended for the management of patients with hypotension due to major trauma. • * There are many potential causes of hypotension. Generally, the causes fall into one of four categories: cardiogenic, distributive, hypovolemic or obstructive. Alternatively, hypotension can be rapidly assessed as a: o Pump problem: Cardiac issues such as dysrhythmia, ischemia, or tamponade o Tank problem: Hypovolemia (intravascular) due to hemorrhage, vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration, sepsis or anaphylaxis o Pipe problem: Large vessel injury or obstruction such as aortic dissection or pulmonary embolism  • Hypotension is a late sign of shock in pediatric patients. Children with tachycardia should be assessed closely for signs of compensated shock and providers must maintain a high index of suspicion that they may progress into decompensated shock with little warning. • When administering fluids to an infant or child, use a three-way stopcock and syringe to pull/push the desired volume.  • ** Use caution when administering IV fluids to patients with known or suspect congestive heart failure or decreased ejection fraction. Large volumes of rapidly administered fluids may lead to pulmonary edema and respiratory distress. Administer smaller boluses (250 mL then reassess) and consider early administration of vasopressors to patients unlikely to tolerate large volumes of IV fluids.  • Administer vasopressors through the largest, most proximal IV site available (AC or higher preferable) or IO. Verify patency prior to initiating infusion and monitor closely for signs of extravasation.  • Use caution when considering positive pressure ventilation for patients with hypotension, particularly due to intravascular hypovolemia (reduced pre-load). Intubation and positive pressure ventilation may lead to a sudden drop in blood pressure or circulatory collapse / cardiac arrest.   

--- PAGE 115 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Hypotension and Shock Version: January 2024 Hypotension and Shock 
Norepinephrine (Levophed) Drip Chart To mix, add 4 mg Norepinephrine to 250 mL 0.9% Sodium Chloride Final Concentration: 16 mcg/mL  Dose Drops per minute with 60-drop set 5 mcg/min 19 6 mcg/min 23 7 mcg/min 26 8 mcg/min 30 9 mcg/min 34 10 mcg/min 38 12.5 mcg/min 47 15 mcg/min 56 17.5 mcg/min 65 20 mcg/min 75          

--- PAGE 116 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Hypotension and Shock Version: January 2024 Hypotension and Shock 
Epinephrine Drip Chart To mix, add 1 mg (1 mg/mL) Epinephrine to 100 mL 0.9% Sodium Chloride Final Concentration: 10 mcg/mL  Dose Drops per minute with 60-drop set 1 mcg/min 6 2 mcg/min 12 3 mcg/min 18 4 mcg/min 24 5 mcg/min 30 6 mcg/min 36 7 mcg/min 42 8 mcg/min 48 9 mcg/min 54 10 mcg/min 60  

--- PAGE 117 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Nausea / Vomiting Version: January 2024 Nausea / Vomiting 
CRITERIA Any patient with persistent nausea or vomiting. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Place patient in a position of comfort. If unresponsive, place in recovery position and provide suctioning. Refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure, as needed. EMR EMR Refer to Hypotension and Shock protocol, as needed.  EMT Consider:  ADULT: Ondansetron (Zofran) 4 mg ODT.  May repeat in 10 - 15 minutes, as needed. EMT A Consider: ADULT: Ondansetron (Zofran) 4 mg IV/IO slow push, IM or PO. PEDIATRIC: Ondansetron (Zofran) 0.15 mg/kg IV/IO slow push, IM or PO. Maximum dose: 4 mg May repeat in 10 - 15 minutes, as needed. Ondansetron solution may be given orally (PO) to patients who can swallow if IV/IO/IM is not desired. A MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  MC  PEARLS • Caution: Administer IV Ondansetron (Zofran) via slow push – at least 30 seconds, but preferably 2 minutes. • Caution: Ondansetron is safe and effective at low doses but known to prolong the cardiac QT interval, increasing the risk of potentially lethal arrhythmia in patients taking other drugs which prolong the QT interval (e.g. Amiodarone, Haloperidol) and patients with pre-existing prolonged-QTc (≥ 500 ms). Assess and consider risk prior to administration. • Anti-emetic medications are often more effective when given prophylactically or for nausea prior to vomiting. • Maximum total dose of Ondansetron is 8 mg (Adult) or 0.3 mg/kg (Pediatric).    

--- PAGE 118 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 119 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Overdose / Poisoning / Toxic Ingestion Version: January 2024 Overdose / Poisoning / Toxic Ingestions 
CRITERIA • Any patient with signs of symptoms of drug / medication overdose or report of toxic ingestion • For chemical / biological / radiological exposures, refer to CBRNE protocols. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Remove patient from the source of exposure.  Decontaminate if necessary. Brush of powders. Irrigate / dilute liquids.  EMR EMR Ensure adequate ventilation. Provide supplemental oxygen as needed to maintain SpO2 94 – 98%. Refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure.  EMR EMR If seizing or a seizure has occurred, refer to Seizure protocol. EMR EMT Assess blood glucose. Refer to Hypoglycemia / Hyperglycemia protocol as needed. EMT EMT Obtain and transmit a 12-Lead ECG. EMT  Opiate  EMT If apneic/bradypneic, provide respiratory support and administer:  ADULT: Naloxone (Narcan) 1 – 2 mg IN PEDIATRIC: Naloxone (Narcan) 1 -2 mg IN Repeat at double the initial dose if no response in 5 minutes.  EMT A If apneic/bradypneic, provide respiratory support and administer:  ADULT: Naloxone (Narcan) 0.5 – 2 mg IV/IO slow push or IM/IN PEDIATRIC: Naloxone (Narcan) 0.1 mg/kg IV/IO slow push or IM/IN. Maximum dose 2 mg. Repeat at double the initial dose if no response in 5 minutes. A 

--- PAGE 120 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Overdose / Poisoning / Toxic Ingestion Version: January 2024 Overdose / Poisoning / Toxic Ingestions 
 Calcium Channel Blocker / Beta Blocker  
I If hypotensive with signs of poor perfusion, administer:  ADULT: Calcium chloride 1 g IV/IO slow push  Followed by a 20 mL 0.9% sodium chloride flush PEDIATRIC: Calcium Chloride 20mg/kg (max dose 1g) IV/IO slow push  Followed by 20 mL 0.9% sodium chloride flush AND ADULT: Glucagon 1 mg IV/IO slow push PEDIATRIC (< 25 kg): Glucagon 0.5 mg IV/IO slow push PEDIATRIC (≥ 25 kg): Glucagon 1 mg IV/IO slow push If no response, refer to Hypotension and Shock protocol.  I 
 Organophosphate / Cholinergic  I For respiratory distress due to bronchorrhea, administer:  ADULT: Atropine sulfate 2 mg IV/IO/IM PEDIATRIC (< 40 kg): Atroprine sulfate 1mg IV/IO/IM PEDIATRIC (≥ 40 kg): Atropine sulfate 2 mg IV/IO/IM Repeat every 5 minutes until respiratory secretions reduce and work of breathing improves.  I  Anti-Cholinergic & Tricyclic Antidepressant (TCA)  EMR Begin active cooling if temperature is greater than 104F / 40C.  Refer to Heat stroke / Hyperthermia protocol. EMR I Assess and monitor cardiac rhythm. For wide QRS (Adult: > 120 ms, Ped: > 90 ms) or arrhythmia, administer:  ADULT: Sodium bicarbonate 50 mEq IV/IO slow push PEDIATRIC: Sodium bicarbonate 1 mEq/kg IV/IO slow push. Maximum dose 50 mEq.  Repeat once in 5 – 10 minutes for cardiac arrest or persistent ECG changes.   

--- PAGE 121 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Overdose / Poisoning / Toxic Ingestion Version: January 2024 Overdose / Poisoning / Toxic Ingestions 
 Cyanide  
I For altered mental status, seizures, hypotension, and/or cardiac arrest following exposure to combustion products in an enclosed space or suspected cyanide poisoning, administer (if available): ADULT: Hydroxocobalamin (CYANOKIT) 5 g IV/IO, infuse over 15 minutes  PEDIATRIC: Hydroxocobalamin (CYANOKIT) 70 mg/kg IV/IO, infuse over 15 minutes  To reconstitute for infusion:   Add: 200mL of 0.9% Sodium Chloride to Hydroxocobalamin (CYANOKIT) vial using the transfer spike included in the kit. Fill to the line.   Mix: Repeatedly invert or rock the vial for at least 60 seconds. Do not shake. I MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  MC  PEARLS • Contact the Poison Control Center at 1-800-222-1222 with any questions. Note: Although Poison Control can provide invaluable expert guidance, it is not online medical control. If recommendations fall outside of protocols, contact medical control for guidance.   • Ensure the patient is decontaminated and appropriate PPE is worn if there is any concern for dermal exposure (particularly organophosphates). • Even small amounts of some drugs / medications can lead to permanent disability or death in small children.  Some or all of the effects may be delayed. Maintain a low threshold to transport even well-appearing children following possible toxic ingestions and consider contacting Poison Control and/or Medical Control for guidance. • Hydroxocobalamin (Cyanokit) is not provided as part of the PEMS regional drug box exchange program. Availability may vary between agencies. Dosing guidelines are provided here for reference only – refer to agency specific protocols prior to administration, if applicable.   

--- PAGE 122 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 123 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Respiratory Distress Version: January 2024 Respiratory Distress 
CRITERIA • Any patient who exhibits signs or symptoms of respiratory distress including abnormal respiratory rate or effort, increased work of breathing, abnormal breath sounds, cyanosis, or complains of dyspnea, shortness of breath or difficulty breathing.  • For respiratory distress due to an allergic reaction, refer to the Allergic Reaction / Anaphylaxis protocol. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Perform a focused evaluation including pertinent history and assessment of airway and lung sounds.  Refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure (includes airway foreign body). EMR EMR Provide supplemental oxygen to maintain SpO2 > 94%. EMR EMT Consider non-invasive (CPAP) or invasive (SGA) ventilatory support. EMT I Consider invasive ventilatory support via endotracheal intubation.  Refer to Endotracheal Intubation procedure. Note: Intubation of spontaneously breathing patients without rapid sequence induction (RSI) is generally not recommended. RSI is not addressed in PEMS regional protocols – refer to agency specific protocols for guidance. I  Asthma, COPD, Reactive Airway Disease  EMT Administer:  ADULT: Albuterol Sulfate 3 mL of 0.083% solution, nebulized. Repeat as necessary. ADULT: Ipratropium Bromide 3 mL of 0.02% solution, nebulized. Once. PEDIATRIC: Albuterol Sulfate 3 mL of 0.083% solution, nebulized. Repeat as necessary. PEDIATRIC: Ipratropium Bromide 3 mL of 0.02% solution, nebulized. Once. EMT A For moderate to severe symptoms, also administer:  ADULT: Methylprednisolone (Solu-Medrol) 125 mg IV/IO slow push. PEDIATRIC: Methylprednisolone (Solu-Medrol) 2 mg/kg IV/IO slow push.  Maximum dose: 125 mg A 

--- PAGE 124 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Respiratory Distress Version: January 2024 Respiratory Distress 
I For severe symptoms, also administer:  ADULT: Magnesium Sulfate 2 g IV/IO infusion over 15 minutes PEDIATRIC: Magnesium Sulfate 40 mg/kg IV/IO over 15 minutes.  Maximum dose: 2,000 mg (2 g) I  Stridor  A Administer:  ADULT: Epinephrine 3 mg [1 mg/mL] nebulized PEDIATRIC: Epinephrine 3 mg [1 mg/mL] nebulized May repeat once, if needed. A A For moderate to severe symptoms, also administer:  ADULT: Methylprednisolone (Solu-Medrol) 125 mg IV/IO slow push. PEDIATRIC: Methylprednisolone (Solu-Medrol) 2 mg/kg IV/IO slow push.  Maximum dose: 125 mg A  Bronchiolitis  A Provide suctioning as needed and consider: PEDIATRIC: 0.9% Sodium Chloride, 6 mL nebulized. Repeat as needed for increased work of breathing due to secretions.  A  Pulmonary Edema  A Administer: ADULT: Nitroglycerine 0.4 mg SL  If SBP remains greater than 100 mmHg (MAP 65 mmHg), may repeat every five minutes as needed, up to three doses. A I Administer:  ADULT: Furosemide (Lasix) 40 mg IV/IO slow push I    MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  MC  

--- PAGE 125 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Respiratory Distress Version: January 2024 Respiratory Distress 
PEARLS •  Appropriate treatment of patients experiencing respiratory distress relies on careful consideration of the underlying cause. During the initial evaluation, first assess for conditions requiring immediate action such as airway obstruction, respiratory failure requiring ventilatory support, cardiac ischemia, or tension pneumothorax/hemothorax. Refer to the condition specific protocols, as necessary.   • Use all available data to make an informed decision as to the most likely cause of the patient’s respiratory distress, including known recent and chronic medical history, medications and physical exam via lung assessment, presence or absence of pulmonary/peripheral edema, JVD, productive cough etc.  • Use caution when administering epinephrine to patients with suspected asthma/COPD/reactive airway disease who ALSO have a history or signs of congestive heart failure. Contact medical control immediately for guidance if there is any doubt as to whether epinephrine is indicated. • Early use of non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (CPAP) to support work of breathing has been shown to reduce the need for intubation and improve outcomes. Positive pressure ventilation does not replace the need for treatment of the underlying cause of respiratory distress. Close monitoring for the development of hypotension and/or pneumothorax is required.  • In severe cases of asthma/COPD/reactive airway disease, wheezing may be slight or absent if air movement is minimal. As bronchodilator therapy takes effect and air movement increases, wheezing may paradoxically worsen before improving. In all cases, judge the effectiveness of therapy and escalate / de-escalate based on the patient’s comfort, work of breathing and vital signs.  • Prior to administering nitroglycerin to any patient: obtain IV access, ensure blood pressure is acceptable (SBP ≥ 100 mmHg and MAP ≥ 65), and assess for the recent use of PDE inhibitors (eg. Sildenafil, Vardenafil, Tadalafil). Note: these medications are routinely prescribed to both men and women for a variety of conditions.   

--- PAGE 126 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 127 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Seizure Version: January 2024 Seizure 
CRITERIA • Any patient with witnessed or reported seizure-like activity • If the patient is pregnant at greater than 20 weeks gestation or up to 8 weeks post-partum AND has no known history of seizures or epilepsy, refer to Eclampsia protocol. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Prevent the patient from sustaining injury, but do not restrain while actively seizing. EMR EMR Provide supplemental oxygen. Refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure. EMR EMR Refer to Overdose / Poisoning / Toxic Ingestion protocol, as needed. EMR EMT Assess blood glucose level. Refer to Hypoglycemia / Hyperglycemia protocol, as needed. EMT [A] If actively seizing for over 5 minutes, administer: ADULT: Midazolam (Versed) 5 mg IV/IO or 10 mg IM PEDIATRIC (< 40 kg): Midazolam (Versed) 2.5 mg IV/IO or 5 mg IM PEDIATRIC (> 40 kg): Midazolam (Versed) 5 mg IV/IO or 10 mg IM Repeat the initial dose once in 5 minutes if seizure activity continues. Use half dose Midazolam for frail, hypotensive, underweight, and/or elderly ( > 65 years) patients.  [A] MC If seizure activity continues for more than 5 minutes following administration of the second dose of Midazolam, initiate transport to the closest emergency department and contact medical control for guidance. MC PEARLS •  Seizures have a multitude of causes including epilepsy, hypoglycemia, trauma, stroke, infection and a variety of chemical overdose and withdrawal conditions.  • Status epilepticus (two or more seizures without a return to baseline, or a single seizure lasting > 5 minutes) is an emergency requiring rapid treatment. Patients experiencing seizures refractory to benzodiazepine therapy may require airway management. Immediate transport to the closest Emergency Department is warranted. • Pediatric febrile seizures are common, but transport to an emergency department for close monitoring and further evaluation is recommended.  • Caution: Both seizures and benzodiazepines may lead to significant respiratory depression. Monitor airway and breathing closely. Refer to Airway Management and Ventilatory Support for treatment guidelines. 

--- PAGE 128 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 129 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Sepsis Version: January 2024 Sepsis 
CRITERIA • Suspected infection with measure temperature greater than 38°C / 100.4°F or less than 36°C / 96.8°F • AND two or more of the following criteria   < 1 month 1 mo – 1 yr 2 – 5 years 6 – 12 years 13 years + Mentation Lethargic, Altered Mental Status High Risk Immunocompromised, Malignancy, Indwelling catheters/tech, Sickle Cell Disease Bradycardia < 100 < 90 N/A Systolic BP Less than 70 mmHg Less than 90 mmHg MAP Less than 55 mmHg Less than 65 mmHg Respiratory Rate > 60 > 30 Capillary Refill Greater than 3 seconds EtCO2 Less than 25 mmHg  PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR A Obtain IV/IO access. Administer:* ADULT: 0.9% Sodium chloride up to 1 L IV/IO in 250 – 500 mL boluses  PEDIATRIC: 0.9% Sodium chloride 20 mL/kg IV/IO Repeat as needed to maintain adequate perfusion, up to 60 mL/kg total. A 
I Maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP) above 65 mmHg. Consider:  ADULT: Norepinephrine (Levophed) infusion 5 – 20 mcg/min IV/IO (Add 4 mg of Norepinephrine to 250 mL 0.9% Sodium chloride = 16 mcg/mL) OR ADULT: Epinephrine infusion 2 – 10 mcg/min IV/IO  (Add 1 mg of Epinephrine [1mg/mL] to 100 mL of 0.9% Sodium chloride = 10 mcg/mL) I 

--- PAGE 130 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Sepsis Version: January 2024 Sepsis 
[ I ] Maintain age adjusted SBP. Consider:  PEDIATRIC: Epinephrine 0.1  - 1 mcg/kg/min IV/IO infusion. Max dose: 10 mcg/min.  Under 1 year old: Titrate to SBP > 70 mmHg Over 1 year old: Titrate to SBP > 90 mmHg (Add 1 mg of Epinephrine [1mg/mL] to 100 mL of 0.9% Sodium chloride = 10 mcg/mL) Note: Infusion via IV pump is preferred is available. Monitor closely for signs of extravasation. [ I ] P To maintain MAP > 65 mmHg until a vasopressor infusion is prepared, consider:  ADULT: Push dose Epinephrine 5-10 mcg IV/IO every 2-3 minutes  (Add 100 mcg Epinephrine (1mL of 0.1 mg/mL) to 9mL of 0.9% Normal Saline = 10 mcg / mL) P MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed, and advise of a “Prehospital Sepsis Alert.” MC  PEARLS • *Use caution when administering IV fluids to patients with known or suspect congestive heart failure or decreased ejection fraction. Septic patients may be at higher risk of developing pulmonary edema and acute respiratory distress. Monitor closely for fluid overload. Large volumes of rapidly administered fluids may lead to pulmonary edema and respiratory distress. Administer smaller boluses (eg 250 mL then reassess) and consider early administration of vasopressors to patients unlikely to tolerate large volumes of IV fluids. If risk vs benefit of either therapy is in doubt or unclear, contact medical control for guidance. • High risk patients for sepsis and septic shock include: Age < 56 days (8 weeks), presence of an indwelling catheter, malignancy, asplenia/sickle cell disease, use of immunosuppressant medications and any other immunocompromised condition.  • Administer vasopressor through the largest, most proximal IV site available (AC or higher preferable) or IO. Verify patency prior to initiating infusion and monitor closely for signs of extravasation such as pain, skin pallor, absent distal pulses, and/or swelling at the infusion site.  • Prehospital sepsis screening and notification have been shown to reduce time to treatment in Emergency Departments and improve mortality.   • Refer to Hypotension / Shock protocol for vasopressor drip reference charts.   

--- PAGE 131 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Stroke / TIA Version: February 2024 Stroke / TIA 
CRITERIA • Any patient presenting with new neurologic symptoms indicative of stroke (BEFAST) including:  o Altered mental status o Abnormal or slurred speech o Facial droop o Unilateral weakness o Balance of gait instability o Vision changes. • BEFAST = Balance, Eyes, Face, Arms, Speech, Time PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Assess probability of large vessel occlusion (LVO) using RACE stroke scale. See table below. EMR EMR Record time the patient last seen normal and family contact information, if available.* Provide this information to the receiving facility.  EMR EMT Obtain blood glucose level. If less than 60 mg/dL, refer to Hypoglycemia protocol. EMT EMT Initiate transport. Goal scene time < 15 minutes: Symptoms less than 24 hours (or unknown) AND suspected LVO (RACE = 5 - 9) :  Transport to the closest comprehensive stroke center as long as transport time is not increased by greater than 30 minutes.  Symptoms greater than 24 hours OR low suspicion for LVO (RACE = 0 - 4):  Transport to the closest stroke center. EMT MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  MC       

--- PAGE 132 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Stroke / TIA Version: February 2024 Stroke / TIA 
PEARLS • It is critical to determine, whenever possible, the time of onset of any acute neurologic symptoms. These include headache, weakness, slurred speech, dizziness, altered mental status or any other symptoms that may be consistent with acute stroke.  • Bring any medications or medication list, if available, with the patient.  • To expedite assessment in the ED, be prepared to answer questions regarding anticoagulant use, recent surgeries or trauma, bleeding disorders, or prior stroke.  • To facilitate rapid imaging, an 18g IV in the right antecubital (AC) site is preferred.  • Approximately 85% of patients diagnosed with a large vessel occlusion have a RACE score ≥ 5. Approximately 69% of patients with a RACE score ≥ 5 will be diagnosed with an LVO. For these patients, endovascular therapy (available only at comprehensive/thrombectomy capable stoke centers) has been shown to lead to better long-term outcomes.  • Any patient with an immediate life-threat (e.g. uncontrolled airway, cardiac arrest) that cannot be addressed during transport should be transported to the nearest emergency department. • Call COR at the receiving facility to inform of the patient’s name and date of birth for rapid registration.                  

--- PAGE 133 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Stroke / TIA Version: February 2024 Stroke / TIA 
 Rapid Arterial oCclusion Evaluation (RACE)  Assessment Instruction Severity Score Facial palsy / droop Ask patient the smile / show teeth Absent  (symmetric movement) 0 Mild  (slightly asymmetric) 1 Moderate to severe  (completely asymmetrical) 2 Arm weakness Extend each arm at 90 degrees (if sitting) or 45 degrees (if supine). Normal to mild (holds > 10 seconds) 0 Moderate  (holds < 10 seconds) 1 Severe (drops immediately) 2 Leg weakness Raise each leg to 30 degrees (in supine position). Normal to mild (holds > 5 seconds) 0 Moderate (holds < 5 seconds) 1 Severe (drops immediately) 2 Head / Gaze Deviation Observe for eye or head deviation to one side. Absent (eyes move to both sides, no head deviation) 0 Present (eyes and/or head deviated to one side) 1 Aphasia (If RIGHT hemiparesis) Ask the patient to: 1. “Close your eyes.”  2. Make a fist.” Normal (performs both tasks correctly) 0 Moderate (performs one task correctly) 1 Severe (performs neither task correctly) 2 Agnosia (If LEFT hemiparesis) Ask the patient: 1. “Whose arm is this?” while showing the left arm. 2. “Can you lift both arms and clap?” Normal (Recognizes own arm AND deficit) 0 Moderate (Recognizes own arm OR deficit) 1 Severe (Cannot recognize own arm or decifit) 2  Total score: 0 – 9  

--- PAGE 134 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 135 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Supraventricular Tachycardia  Version: January 2024 Supraventricular Tachycardia 
CRITERIA • Any patient with sustained supraventricular tachycardia (SVT). • SVT: Narrow complex (Adult < 120 ms, Ped < 90 ms), rate usually > 150 bpm, no P waves • Patients with chest pain, dyspnea, altered mental status, pulmonary edema, or other signs/symptoms of shock should be considered unstable.   • For wide complex tachycardias, refer to Ventricular Tachycardia with a Pulse. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR  Stable Supraventricular Tachycardia  EMT Obtain and transmit a 12-Lead ECG. EMT A Obtain IV access. Consider:  ADULT: 0.9% Sodium chloride up to 1 L IV/IO in 250 – 500 mL boluses  PEDIATRIC: 0.9% Sodium chloride 20 mL/kg IV/IO Repeat as needed to maintain adequate perfusion, up to 60 mL/kg total. A I If the rhythm is regular, consider: ADULT: Adenosine (Adenocard) 6 mg IV/IO followed by a 20 mL 0.9% Sodium chloride flush.  PEDIATRIC: Adenosine (Adenocard) 0.1 mg/kg IV/IO followed by a 10 – 20 mL 0.9% Sodium chloride flush. Maximum dose 6 mg.  If no conversion within 2 minutes, consider repeating one time at double the initial dose. I I If the rhythm is irregular/atrial fibrillation, initiate transport to an appropriate facility.  Monitor for signs of poor perfusion. I  Unstable Supraventricular Tachycardia  I For light sedation, if time and patient condition permit, consider:  ADULT: Midazolam (Versed) 2.5 mg IV/IO or 5 mg IN/IM  PEDIATRIC: Midazolam (Versed) 0.05 mg/kg IV/IO or 0.1 mg/kg IM. Maximum dose 2.5 mg IV/IO or 5 mg IM. Monitor SpO2 and EtCO2. I 

--- PAGE 136 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Supraventricular Tachycardia  Version: January 2024 Supraventricular Tachycardia 
I Perform synchronized cardioversion. ADULT: 100 joules initial dose If cardioversion is unsuccessful, check pad placement and repeat at 200 joules. PEDIATRIC: 1 joule/kg initial dose  If cardioversion is unsuccessful, check pad placement and repeat at 2 joules/kg. If cardioversion is unsuccessful after two attempts, contact Medical Control for guidance. I MC Contact Medical Control if uncertain regarding rhythm, most appropriate therapy, and for guidance as needed. Ensure a 12-Lead ECG is transmitted. MC  PEARLS • Unstable vs stable: Unstable patients are those with signs/symptoms consistent with poor or inadequate perfusion (chest pain, AMS, hypotension, diaphoresis, respiratory distress etc). Compensated vs decompensated tachycardia is another way of describing this difference. Stable/compensated patients may be symptomatic (palpitations or mild shortness of breath with exertion, for example) but are not in extremis.  • There are many potential causes for tachyarrhythmias including heart disease, fever, sepsis, trauma, pain, hypoxia, hypovolemia, hypoglycemia, toxic ingestion, myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism, electrolyte abnormalities and many others. Prehospital therapy is based on early identification and treatment of unstable arrythmias and those at risk of rapid deterioration as well as the inciting factor.  • Many patients who experience tachyarrhythmias have concurrent congestive heart failure or decreased ejection fraction. Exercise caution when providing IV fluids – give only enough to improve perfusion and monitor for signs of pulmonary edema.  • In rare cases, electrical cardioversion to sinus rhythm can result in embolization of small blood clots from the heart, leading to stroke. Following emergent cardioversion, monitor closely for changes in mental status or physical exam and reassess destination choice as appropriate.  • Dosing of electrical therapy described above serves as a guideline only. Confirm agency dosing for cardioversion and defibrillation with device specific manufacturers recommendations.  • Ensure the device is set to SYNC prior to any attempted cardioversion of a patient with a palpable pulse. Unsynchronized cardioversion/defibrillation may lead to ventricular fibrillation and cardiac arrest.   

--- PAGE 137 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Ventricular Tachycardia with a Pulse  Version: January 2024 Ventricular Tachycardia with a Pulse  
CRITERIA • Any patient with sustained ventricular tachycardia with a palpable pulse. • Ventricular tachycardia: Wide complex (Adult > 120 ms, Ped > 90 ms), no P waves, usual rate > 150 bpm • Patients with chest pain, dyspnea, altered mental status, pulmonary edema, or other signs/symptoms of shock should be considered unstable.   PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR  Stable Ventricular Tachycardia with a Pulse  EMT Obtain and transmit a 12-Lead ECG. EMT I If the rhythm is monomorphic and regular, consider: ADULT: Adenosine (Adenocard) 6 mg IV/IO followed by a 20 mL 0.9% Sodium chloride flush.  PEDIATRIC: Contact Medical Control for guidance. If no conversion within 2 minutes, consider repeating one time at double the initial dose. I I If the rhythm is irregular/polymorphic, or there is no improvement with Adenosine, consider:  ADULT: Amiodarone (Cordarone) 150 mg IV/IO in 100 mL 0.9% Sodium chloride.  Infuse over 10 minutes. PEDIATRIC: Contact Medical Control for guidance. I  Unstable Ventricular Tachycardia with a Pulse  I For light sedation, if time and patient condition permit, consider:  ADULT: Midazolam (Versed) 2.5 mg IV/IO or 5 mg IN/IM  PEDIATRIC: Midazolam (Versed) 0.05 mg/kg IV/IO or 0.1 mg/kg IM. Maximum dose 2.5 mg IV/IO or 5 mg IM.  Monitor SpO2 and EtCO2. I 
I If wide complex and regular, perform synchronized cardioversion. ADULT: 100 joules initial dose If cardioversion is unsuccessful, check pad placement and repeat at 200 joules. PEDIATRIC: 1 joule/kg initial dose  If cardioversion is unsuccessful, check pad placement and repeat at 2 joules/kg. If cardioversion is unsuccessful after two attempts, contact Medical Control for guidance.  I 

--- PAGE 138 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Ventricular Tachycardia with a Pulse  Version: January 2024 Ventricular Tachycardia with a Pulse  
I If wide complex and irregular/polymorphic, perform defibrillation: ADULT: 100 joules initial dose If defibrillation is unsuccessful, check pad placement and repeat at 200 joules. PEDIATRIC: 1 joules/kg initial dose If cardioversion is unsuccessful, check pad placement and repeat at 2 joules/kg. I I  Administer: ADULT: Amiodarone (Cordarone) 150 mg IV/IO in 100 mL 0.9% Sodium chloride.  Infuse over 10 minutes. PEDIATRIC: Contact Medical Control for guidance.  I MC Contact Medical Control if uncertain regarding rhythm, most appropriate therapy, and for guidance as needed. Ensure a 12-Lead ECG is transmitted.  MC PEARLS • Unstable vs stable: Unstable patients are those with signs/symptoms consistent with poor or inadequate perfusion (chest pain, AMS, hypotension, diaphoresis, respiratory distress etc). Compensated vs decompensated tachycardia is another way of describing this difference. Stable/compensated patients may be symptomatic (palpitations or mild shortness of breath with exertion, for example) but are not in extremis.  • There are many potential causes for tachyarrhythmias including heart disease, fever, sepsis, trauma, pain, hypoxia, hypovolemia, hypoglycemia, toxic ingestion, myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism, electrolyte abnormalities and many others. Prehospital therapy is based on early identification and treatment of unstable arrythmias and those at risk of rapid deterioration as well as the inciting factor.  • Many patients who experience tachyarrhythmias have concurrent congestive heart failure or decreased ejection fraction. Exercise caution when providing IV fluids – give only enough to improve perfusion and monitor for signs of pulmonary edema.  • In rare cases, electrical cardioversion to sinus rhythm can result in embolization of small blood clots from the heart, leading to stroke. Following emergent cardioversion, monitor closely for changes in mental status or physical exam and reassess destination choice as appropriate.  • Dosing of electrical therapy described above serves as a guideline only. Confirm agency dosing for cardioversion and defibrillation with device specific manufacturers recommendations.  • Ensure the device is set to SYNC prior to any attempted cardioversion of a patient with a palpable pulse. Unsynchronized cardioversion/defibrillation may lead to ventricular fibrillation and cardiac arrest.  • If the rhythm is polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, synchronization may not be possible.  This is the only time a patient with a palpable pulse is treated with unsynchronized defibrillation.  

--- PAGE 139 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Ventricular Tachycardia with a Pulse  Version: January 2024 Ventricular Tachycardia with a Pulse  
• The incidence of wide complex tachyarrhythmias in children is very low, and many of these patients have complex, rare conditions. Additionally, many pediatric patients can compensate well for tachycardia and may remain stable without major intervention. Consultation with a Medical Control physician is recommended prior to administering medication for wide complex tachycardia in children. When possible, consider contacting Medical Control at a pediatric specialty center for guidance.  o Children’s Hospital of the King’s Daughters COR: 757-668-8000 o VCU Children’s Hospital of Richmond communications: 804-828-3989 

--- PAGE 140 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 141 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Childbirth / Labor / Delivery Version: March 2024  Childbirth / Labor / Delivery 
 CRITERIA • Any patient with known or suspected pregnancy and symptoms of term or pre-term labor (contractions, loss of fluid, vaginal bleeding and/or urge to push) PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol.  Don appropriate PPE including gloves (sterile if available), gown, and eye protection. EMR EMR Remove all clothing below the waist. Visualize perineum and assess for crowning or presenting part. EMR EMR If significant bleeding, refer to Hemorrhagic Shock protocol. EMR EMR If breech presentation or cord prolapse, refer to guidance below.  EMR EMR If crowning, apply gentle pressure on the bony part of the skull (not fontanel) for controlled delivery. EMR EMR Once head is delivered, assess for nuchal cord. Unwrap if possible. Clamp and cut if necessary. EMR EMR Support the head while delivering the shoulders and torso.   Shoulder Dystocia If unable to deliver the anterior shoulder, place the patient in McRobert’s position (see image below) and apply suprapubic pressure. If no progress, contact Medical Control immediately for guidance.  EMR EMR Once delivery is complete, dry and stimulate the neonate.  Assess heart rate, respirations, and oxygen saturation. Follow Neonatal Resuscitation protocol. EMR EMR Routine suctioning is no longer recommended. Only perform pharyngeal/tracheal suctioning if thick meconium is present or when the airway is obstructed.  EMR EMR If the neonate does not require immediate resuscitation, consider delayed cord clamping until 1 – 3 minutes after birth. When pulsation of the cord has ceased, place clamps at approximately 4” and 6” from the neonate. Cut between them. Keep the baby warm and monitor closely.  EMR EMR Assess for additional pregnancies. If none, apply gentle traction to the umbilical cord and perform fundal massage until the placenta delivers and bleeding stops. Transport the placenta with the mother. If possible, allow skin to skin contact for the mother and baby.  EMR EMR Apply direct pressure to any visible sites of bleeding. If bleeding continues, refer to Hemorrhagic Shock protocol and initiate transport, preferably to a facility with Obstetric capability if condition allows.  EMR 

--- PAGE 142 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Childbirth / Labor / Delivery Version: March 2024  Childbirth / Labor / Delivery 
EMR UMBILICAL CORD PROLAPSE Immediately transport to a facility with obstetric capability. Do not attempt vaginal delivery.    Maintain a pulse in the cord by gently lifting the presenting part and relieving pressure on the cord.  Wrap the prolapsed cord in saline soaked gauze. Avoid excessive manipulation of the exposed cord. Consider transport in Trendelenburg position, with the hips elevated.  Contact Medical Control as soon as feasible for guidance. EMR 
EMR BREECH DELIVERY  Initiate transport, preferably to a facility with obstetric capability. If delivery is imminent:  Contact Medical Control as soon as feasible for guidance. Allow controlled spontaneous delivery with contractions to the level of the umbilicus.  Deliver the legs, if possible. Wrap a towel around the baby’s legs/hips for better traction.  Gently rotate the torso so the baby is face down in the birth canal.  Once the scapula is visible, gently rotate a few degrees and swipe across the chest to deliver the arms. Have a second provider apply firm but gentle suprapubic pressure. Maintain flexion of the neck (chin to chest) with downward traction by two fingers on the maxilla.  Follow standard post-delivery care, as above.  EMR 
MC All patients must be secured with appropriate safety restraints for transport.  Do not transport the baby in the mother’s arms.  Transport to the closest appropriate facility while closely monitoring the mother and neonate(s).  Contact Medical Control at any time for guidance.  MC PEARLS • Patients who are known or suspected to be pregnant and are experiencing profuse vaginal bleeding should be transported to a facility with obstetric capability if patient condition and geographic constraints allow.  o Conditions such as uterine rupture and placental abruption are rare but cannot be managed effectively in the field and will most likely present with severe abdominal pain and symptoms consistent with hemorrhagic shock.  • Gestational age can be approximated by the palpable height of the uterine fundus, with 20 weeks being roughly the height of the umbilicus. Resuscitation should be attempted for any fetus born after 22 weeks gestational age. If unsure of gestational age or viability, initiate resuscitative efforts by following the Neonatal Resuscitation protocol and contact medical control for guidance.  • Rupture of membranes (loss of fluid) prior to 37 weeks gestation is considered premature. These patients are at an increased risk of umbilical cord prolapse and need for resuscitation of the neonate.  • Hypotension not associated with blood loss should be addressed with IV fluids and, if possible, relieving weight on the IVC by placing the patient in a left lateral recumbent position. • Consider requesting an additional transport unit to the scene to care for the neonate if delivery is imminent.  • No NOT apply pressure to the uterine fundus. Suprapubic pressure is used to guide the fetus under the pubic symphysis.  • Normal newborn SpO2 is 60-70% in the first minute of life, 80-85% at five minutes, and 85-95% at ten minutes. 

--- PAGE 143 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Childbirth / Labor / Delivery Version: March 2024  Childbirth / Labor / Delivery 
 McRobert’s position for shoulder dystocia  (anterior shoulder unable to pass the pubic symphysis)  
     


--- PAGE 144 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Childbirth / Labor / Delivery Version: March 2024  Childbirth / Labor / Delivery 
Breech Delivery 
 
 


--- PAGE 145 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Childbirth / Labor / Delivery Version: March 2024  Childbirth / Labor / Delivery 
Prolapsed umbilical cord 
 Relieving pressure on the prolapsed umbilical cord 
 


--- PAGE 146 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 147 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Eclampsia Version: March 2024 Eclampsia 
CRITERIA • Pre-eclampsia with severe features: Any pregnant (or recently pregnant) patient over 20 weeks gestational age presenting with one or more of the following:  o Systolic blood pressure greater than 160 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure greater than 110 mmHg  o Severe and/or persistent headache  o Right upper quadrant or epigastric abdominal pain o New onset of visual disturbance o Pulmonary edema  • Eclampsia: Any pregnant or recently pregnant patient over 20 weeks gestational age experiencing seizures. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMT Transport to a facility with labor and delivery capability.  EMT I If actively seizing or a seizure has occurred (Eclampsia), administer:  ADULT: Magnesium Sulfate 4 g IV/IO infusion over 10 minutes. I I If seizure continues for more than five minutes, also administer:  ADULT: Midazolam (Versed) 5 mg IV/IO or 10 mg IM  Use half dose Midazolam for frail, hypotensive, and/or underweight patients. I MC If seizures continue or reoccur, contact medical control for guidance including transport destination. MC  PEARLS •  Pre-Eclampsia and Eclampsia can occur up to 8 weeks AFTER delivery of the baby.  • The primary goal of therapy is to prevent or limit seizures, and rapid intervention is warranted. If administration of Magnesium will be delayed due to lack of IV/IO access or need for reconstitution, consider early IM administration of midazolam followed by Magnesium infusion as soon as feasible.  • For the patient who presents with pre-eclampsia and deteriorates to eclampsia (seizes), the total maximum dose is 4g Magnesium Sulfate. • Provide early notification to the hospital as non-ED care teams such as OBGYN and anesthesia may need to be mobilized.  • Caution: Administration of Magnesium and Benzodiazepines may lead to respiratory/CNS depression. • Caution: rapid administration of Magnesium may cause vasodilation and hypotension – monitor vitals at least every 5 minutes during infusion and stop infusion immediately if hypotension develops.  

--- PAGE 148 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 149 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Pregnancy Related Emergencies  Version: March 2024 Pregnancy Related Emergencies 
OB/GYN Uterine Rupture Criteria     Uterine Rupture - Severe vaginal bleeding in the second half of pregnancy.  PROTOCOL  EMR Follow General – Universal Patient Care/Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Support life threatening problems associated with airway, breathing and circulation. EMR EMR Administer oxygen as needed per patient assessment. EMR EMR Place patient in left lateral recumbent position and transport immediately. EMR A Establish IV access and administer 20 mL/kg 0.9% Normal Saline bolus up to 1,000 mL; continuously reassessing need for further fluid administration. A  PEARLS Should be suspected in the pregnant trauma patient who has lost the palpable uterine contour, has easily palpated fetal parts, and who has severe abdominal pain.   ABRUPTIO PLACENTA  CRITERIA Premature separation of the placenta from the uterine wall after the 20th week of gestation and prior to birth.   EMR Follow General – Universal Patient Care/Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Support life threatening problems associated with airway, breathing and circulation. EMR EMR Administer oxygen as needed per patient assessment. EMR EMR If patient exhibits signs of shock, see Medical – Hypotension/Shock (Non-trauma). EMR EMR Place patient in left lateral recumbent position and transport immediately. EMR A Establish IV access and administer 20 mL/kg 0.9% Normal Saline bolus up to a total of 1,000 mL; continuously reassess need for further fluid administration. A  PEARLS Patients younger than 20 and greater than 35 years of age are at greater risk for placental abruption.  

--- PAGE 150 ---
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 151 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures CBRNE Table of Contents Version: March 2024  CBRNE Table of Contents 
Title ........................................................................................................................................... Effective Date  Airway/Inhalation Irritants (Exposure………………………………………………………………………...………………………..March 2024  Biological/Infectious (Exposure)…………………………………………………………………………………………………………….March 2024  Blistering Agents (Exposure)………………………………………………………………………………………………….……….………March 2024  Nerve Agents (Exposure)……………………………………………………………………………………………………….…………….…March 2024  Nerve Agents (Pediatric) (Exposure)………………………………………………………………………………….………….………..March 2024  Radiologic Agent (Exposure)…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..March 2024  

--- PAGE 152 ---
 
     This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 153 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Airway / Inhalation Irritants Version: February 2024 CBRNE: Airway / Inhalation Irritants 
CRITERIA • Any patient with likely exposure to a choking agent / airway irritant and one or more of the following symptoms: o Difficulty breathing / respiratory distress o Throat pain / burning  o Wheezing  o Laryngospasm  o Non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema  • For respiratory distress due to nerve agents / organophosphates, refer to Nerve Agents protocol. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMT Consider gross decontamination.  EMT EMT Follow Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure. EMT A Administer:  ADULT: Albuterol Sulfate 3 mL of 0.083% solution, nebulized. Repeat as necessary. PEDIATRIC: Albuterol Sulfate 3 mL of 0.083% solution, nebulized. Repeat as necessary. A A Administer:  ADULT: Methylprednisolone (Solu-Medrol) 125 mg IV/IO slow push. PEDIATRIC: Methylprednisolone (Solu-Medrol) 2 mg/kg IV/IO slow push.  Maximum dose: 125 mg A  For suspected Chlorine gas exposure, consider:  ADULT: Sodium bicarbonate 2 mL diluted with 2 mL 0.9% Sodium chloride, nebulized. Once.  PEDIATRIC: Sodium bicarbonate 2 mL diluted with 2 mL 0.9% Sodium chloride, nebulized. Once.  MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed. MC       

--- PAGE 154 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Airway / Inhalation Irritants Version: February 2024 CBRNE: Airway / Inhalation Irritants 
PEARLS • The decision to enter a contaminated area to rescue and/or provide patient care rests with the incident commander and organizational policy.  • Victims that have been decontaminated and/or confirmed “clean” are safe for treatment and transportation to a health care facility.   Examples of common choking agents: • Chlorine • Ammonia • Phosgene • Fuming Sulfuric Acid • Hydrogen Sulfide • Hydrochloric Acid • Hydrofluoric Acid  Concept of treatment protocol: • Reduce the dose o Rescue from environment o Decontamination  • Optimize airway / ventilation  • Administer treatments / antidotes • Support cardiovascular system / perfusion   Contact the Poison Control Center at 1-800-222-1222 with any questions.  Note: Although Poison Control can provide invaluable expert guidance, it is not online medical control. If recommendations fall outside of protocols, contact medical control for guidance.       

--- PAGE 155 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures CBRNE: Biological / Infectious Version: February 2024 CBRNE: Biological / Infectious 
CRITERIA • Any patient with likely exposure to a biological / infectious agent and one or more of the following otherwise unexplained symptoms:  o Fever o Shortness of breath o Gastrointestinal symptoms o Rash  • Any patient with close contact with a person with a confirmed or suspected diagnosis of an infectious biological agent such as:  o Anthrax o Plague  o Smallpox  o Hemorrhagic Fever (e.g. Ebola, Marburg) PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMT Consider gross decontamination. EMT EMT Follow Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure. EMT EMT Refer to Sepsis protocol, as needed. EMT MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed. MC  PEARLS • Responders should wear a minimum of N-95 respirators with airborne and contact PPE (Level C) when responding to non-specific flu-like symptoms in the setting of a suspected biological incident. Higher levels of PPE may be warranted depending on the suspected biological / infectious agent.  • A surgical mask may be placed on the patient with suspected infection, under a non-rebreather mask if necessary.  • Contact the local health department to determine whether antibiotic prophylaxis is required for first responders and/or close contacts.       

--- PAGE 156 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures CBRNE: Biological / Infectious Version: February 2024 CBRNE: Biological / Infectious 
 Common Biological / Infectious Agents • Anthrax A nonspecific prodrome (i.e., fever, dyspnea, cough, and chest discomfort) follows inhalation of infectious spores. Approximately 2 to 4 days after initial symptoms, sometimes after a brief period of improvement, respiratory failure and hemodynamic collapse ensue. • Plague Clinical features of pneumonic plague include fever, cough with purulent sputum, hemoptysis, and chest pain.   • Smallpox (Variola) The acute clinical symptoms of smallpox resemble other acute viral illnesses, such as influenza, beginning with a 2 to 4 day nonspecific prodrome of fever and myalgias before rash onset. Several clinical features can help clinicians differentiate varicella (chickenpox) from smallpox. The rash of varicella is most prominent on the trunk and develops in successive groups of lesions over several days, resulting in lesions in various stages of development and resolution. In comparison, the vesicular/pustular rash of smallpox is typically most prominent on the face and extremities and lesions develop at the same time.  • Viral hemorrhagic fever The acute clinical symptoms of smallpox resemble other acute viral illnesses, such as influenza, beginning with a 2 to 4 day nonspecific prodrome of fever and myalgias before rash onset. Several clinical features can help clinicians differentiate varicella (chickenpox) from smallpox. The rash of varicella is most prominent on the trunk and develops in successive groups of lesions over several days, resulting in lesions in various stages of development and resolution. In comparison, the vesicular/pustular rash of smallpox is typically most prominent on the face and extremities and lesions develop at the same time.  • Botulinum toxin  Clinical features include symmetric cranial neuropathies (i.e., drooping eyelids, weakened jaw clench, and difficulty swallowing or speaking), blurred vision or diplopia, symmetric descending weakness in a proximal to distal pattern, and respiratory dysfunction from respiratory muscle paralysis or upper airway obstruction without sensory deficits. Inhalational botulism would have a similar clinical presentation as foodborne botulism; however, the gastrointestinal symptoms that accompany foodborne botulism may be absent.  • Ricin Symptoms are specific to individual route of exposure. Severe exposure may lead to multiorgan failure and death within 3 days.     

--- PAGE 157 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures CBRNE: Blistering Agents Version: March 2024 CBRNE: Blistering Agents 
CRITERIA • Any patient with suspected exposure to a blistering agent (including asymptomatic exposure) • Any patient with possible exposure to a blistering agent and signs or symptoms of skin or mucous membrane irritation and/or respiratory distress.  PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Consider gross decontamination. Remove clothing and copiously irrigate exposed areas.  EMR EMR Follow Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure.  Refer to Respiratory Distress protocol, as needed.  EMR EMR If chemical burns are present, follow Burn Injuries protocol. EMR MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  MC   PEARLS • Blistering agents pose a significant risk of exposure to first responders. They are difficult to remove during decontamination and often do not provide immediate signs of contamination. Ensure appropriate PPE is worn during patient contact and maintain a low threshold for gross decontamination.  • Skin penetration is rapid. Mustard agents cause both localized cellular damage and systemic damage. A large liquid or vapor exposure causes immune system failure and pulmonary damage. Sepsis and pulmonary damage the major causes of death.  • Blister agents are powerful skin and mucous membrane irritants and vesicants, produce corrosion and necrosis of the skin, eyes, and respiratory tract. While the chemical reaction with biological tissue occurs rapidly, symptoms are typically delayed by several hours.   Systemic poisoning occurs more easily in warm climates.  • DERMAL exposure: Signs and symptoms typically occurs within 2 – 24 hours of exposure. Itching and erythema occur 2 to 3 hours after dermal exposure to gas or liquid; erythema spreads over the next 24 hours and yellowish blisters appear and can become ulcerated. Thinner skin (neck, axillae, and groin) is more susceptible than thicker skin (soles, palms).  • INHALATION exposure: Cough, hemoptysis, dyspnea, and possible pulmonary edema may occur up to 24 hours after inhalation of the gas. Ulceration of airway mucose may occur. Mild pulmonary exposure produces rhinorrhea, sneezing, epistaxis, hoarseness, and cough within 12 to 24 hours of exposure. Severe exposure produces additional symptoms of productive cough and shortness of breath (mild to severe) 2 to 4 hours after exposure.  

--- PAGE 158 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures CBRNE: Blistering Agents Version: March 2024 CBRNE: Blistering Agents 
• Variations of Blister Agents: o Mustard (Sulfur and Nitrogen) o Lewisite (causes immediate pain on skin contact) o Dimethyl Sulfate • Blister agents are chemical burns (including inhalation injuries) and should be managed as such.  o Chelating agents (e.g. British Anti-Lewisite/BAL) have been used to reduce the effects of exposure. However, no chelating agents are readily available out of hospital in the PEMS region. o Sodium thiosulfate may be available in regional HAZMAT drug caches and has been used to prevent systemic injury. In the event of such a deployment, coordination with VA Poison Control (1-800-222-1222) and receiving facilities is necessary.     

--- PAGE 159 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Nerve Agents Version: December 2023 Nerve Agents 
CRITERIA • Any patient with suspected exposure to a chemical nerve agent or organophosphate AND • Signs / symptoms of exposure, including:  o SLUDGE: Excessive salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, gastrointestinal distress, or emesis o DUMBBELS: Diarrhea, urinary, miosis, bronchorrhea, bradycardia, emesis, lacrimation, or salivation. PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Don appropriate PPE and decontaminate the patient. Do not proceed until it is reasonably safe to do so.  EMR EMR Follow Airway Management and Ventilatory Support procedure.  EMR EMR Refer to Nausea / Vomiting, Seizure, and/or Hypotension and Shock protocols, as needed.  EMR EMT If available, administer:  ADULT: DuoDote Autoinjector IM PEDIATRIC (≥ 40 kg): DuoDote Autoinjector IM If symptoms persist, repeat in 5 minutes up to three doses. EMT I If symptoms persist, or if DuoDote Autoinjector is unavailable, administer:  ADULT: Atropine sulfate 2 mg IV/IO/IM  PEDIATRIC (< 40 kg): Atropine sulfate 1 mg IV/IO/IM PEDIATRIC (≥ 40 kg): Atropine sulfate 2 mg IV/IO/IM  If symptoms persist, repeat every 5 minutes up to three doses.  I MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  MC  PEARLS •  Each DuoDote Autoinjector contains 2.1 mg of Atropine sulfate and 600 mg of Pralodoxime chloride.  • Nerve agents include both common organophosphate/carbamate pesticides and military grade toxins. Examples include: Azinphos-methyl, Malathion, Methyl parathion, Aldicarb, Sevin, Bendiocarb, Sarin, Somen, Tobun, VX, and Novichok. 

--- PAGE 160 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Nerve Agents Version: December 2023 Nerve Agents 
• Victims who have ingested nerve agents may off-gas (exhale) dangerous vapors, even after skin decontamination is complete. Care should be provided by appropriate trained providers wearing respiratory protection that protects against nerve agents including Self Contained Breathing Apparatus (SCBA) and chemical protective clothing to avoid physical contact.  • Symptoms following exposure: Depending on the agent, even a very small drop on the skin (1 mL or less) or inhaled amount can cause sweating, muscle twitching, nausea, vomiting and/or diarrhea. Severely affected casualties will experience loss of consciousness, seizures, bradycardia, bronchospasm/bronchorrhea leading to respiratory distress and flaccid paralysis. Effects may begin in a few minutes following exposure or up to 18 hours later.  • Atropine is the antidote of choice for drying respiratory secretions to treat respiratory distress. Otherwise, care of these patients is generally supportive in nature. • To allow respiratory secretions to drain, victims who are non-ambulatory should be placed in the recovery position if not being transported immediately.   • Depending on the available medication cache, Atropen autoinjectors may be available in lieu of DuoDote and are weight based: o Yellow Pen: Less than 7 kg, 0.25 mg/dose  o Blue Pen: 7 to 18 kg, 0.5 mg/dose  o Red Pen: 18 to 41 kg, 1 mg/dose  o Green pen: Over 41kg, 2mg/dose   

--- PAGE 161 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures CBRNE: Radiologic Agents Version: March 2024 CBRNE: Radiologic Agent 
CRITERIA • Any patient with confirmed or suspected exposure to harmful radiation.  PROTOCOL EMR Follow Universal Patient Care / Initial Patient Contact protocol. EMR EMR Follow Airway Management and Ventilatory Support protocol. EMR EMR If there is a life-threatening illness or injury, treat the patient without regard for contamination.* EMR EMR If there is no life-threatening condition, determine if the patient is contaminated. See Pearls below. EMR EMR Consider gross decontamination.  EMR MC Contact Medical Control for guidance as needed.  MC    PEARLS • *Treatment of seriously injured or ill radiologically contaminated patients takes priority over decontamination. Do not delay advanced life support to assess contamination status.  • Contaminated patients from a Radiation Dispersal Device present a low risk of exposure to healthcare providers.  • Patients with open wounds should have the wound dressed and bandages without cleaning. • Responders should wear a minimum of N-95 respirators when responding to non-specific explosions to reduce the change of internal contamination.   • The mother likely isotopes used for Radiation Dispersal Devices will emit Gamma radiation, in addition to Alpha and Beta particles. Therefore, most available detectors will identify contamination. However, the dispersal of a source reduces the level of radioactivity, and therefore detection above background levels may be difficult.  • When monitoring for patient contamination (external), use of the portal monitors (found at several hospital emergency departments and available through the Hampton Roads Metropolitan Medical Strike Team) and/or the use of hand-held ratemeters with a “pancake” probe is suggested. When using a hand-held ratemeter, a quick “triage” of contamination should focus on the head (hair) and feet (shoes), with a more extensive survey on those found to be contaminated.  

--- PAGE 162 ---
      
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures CBRNE: Radiologic Agents Version: March 2024 CBRNE: Radiologic Agent 
• Once radiological contamination has been identified, the following resources may be of assistance: o Radiation Emergency Assistance Center/Training Site (REACT/TS) § Weekday phone: 865 – 576 – 3131 § Weekend/Afterhours phone: 865 – 576 – 1005 o Armed Forced Radiobiology Research Institute, Medical Radiobiology Team § Phone: 301 – 295 – 0530 • Other antidotes are available in the region and are co-located with the Stategic National Stockpile Chempacks.   

--- PAGE 163 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Pharmacology Table of Contents Version: March 2024 Pharmacology Table of Contents 
Title .................................................................................................................................................. Effective Date  Pharmacology (Generic/Trade) Adenosine/Adenocard .................................................................................................................................. 03/2022  Albuterol Sulfate/Proventil ........................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Amiodarone/Cordarone ............................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Aspirin ........................................................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Atropine Sulfate/Proventil ............................................................................................................................ 03/2022  Calcium Chloride ........................................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Dextrose 10%, 25%, 50% .............................................................................................................................. 03/2022  Diphenhydramine/Benadryl ......................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Epinephrine/Adrenaline ............................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Etomidate/Amidate ...................................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Furosemide/Lasix .......................................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Glucagon ....................................................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Haloperidol/Haldol ....................................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Hydroxocobalamin/CYANOKIT ..................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Ipratropium Bromide/Atrovent .................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Ketamine ...................................................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Ketorolac tromethamine/Toradol ................................................................................................................ 03/2022  Lidocaine/Xylocaine ...................................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Magnesium Sulfate ....................................................................................................................................... 03/2022   

--- PAGE 164 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Pharmacology Table of Contents Version: March 2024 Pharmacology Table of Contents 
Methylprednisolone Succinate/Solu-Medrol ................................................................................................ 03/2022  Midazolam HCl/Versed ................................................................................................................................. 07/2022      Morphine Sulfate ......................................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Naloxone/Narcan ......................................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Nitroglycerin/Nitrostat ................................................................................................................................. 03/2022  Norepinephrine/Levophed ........................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Ondansetron/Zofran ..................................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Rocuronium/Zemuron .................................................................................................................................. 03/2022  Sodium Bicarbonate ..................................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Sublimaze/Fentanyl ...................................................................................................................................... 03/2022  Succinylcholine/Anectine ............................................................................................................................. 03/2022  Vecuronium/Norcuron ................................................................................................................................. 03/2022  Ziprasidone/Geodon ..................................................................................................................................... 03/2022        

--- PAGE 165 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Adenosine (Adenocard) Version: March 2024 Adenosine (Adenocard) 
CLASS:      Antidysrhythmic ACTIONS:   Decreases conduction through the AV node  INDICATIONS:  Tachyarrhythmia – Stable Supraventricular Tachycardia (SVT)  CONTRAINDICTATIONS:  Second or third degree AV block Wolf-Parkinson White Syndrome (WPW) Sick sinus syndrome Known hypersensitivity Use of Dipyridamole products including Persantine and Aggrenox PRECAUTIONS:  Extremely short half-life – use proximal IV site (eg. Antecubital) May precipitate AV block or lethal arrhythmia (asystole, VF, VT)  SIDE EFFECTS:     Brief facial flushing, chest discomfort, bradycardia                 

--- PAGE 166 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 167 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Albuterol Sulfate (Proventil)  Version: March 2024 Albuterol Sulfate (Proventil) 
CLASS:      Inhaled Beta agonist ACTIONS:   Bronchodilator Decreases serum potassium  INDICATIONS:  Allergic reaction Crush injury Respiratory Distress  CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    Hypersensitivity/allergy  PRECAUTIONS:  May cause tachycardia. Monitor closely, especially when used in combination with other sympathomimetic agents such as Epinephrine.  SIDE EFFECTS:     Tremor, nervousness, headache, dizziness, hypertension       tachycardia, nauseua                

--- PAGE 168 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 169 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Amiodarone (Cordarone) Version: March 2024  Amiodarone (Cordarone)  
CLASS:      Antidysrhythmic ACTIONS:   Sodium and potassium channel blocker Prolongs cardiac action potential and repolarization time  INDICATIONS:  Cardiac Arrest: VT/VF refractory to defibrillation Wide Complex Tachycardia (VT with a pulse)  CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    2nd or 3rd degree AV block, known hypersensitivity  PRECAUTIONS:  Caution in use with patients taking Beta blocker, Calcium channel blockers  SIDE EFFECTS:     Hypotension, Bradycardia, nausea/vomiting, flushing                  

--- PAGE 170 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 171 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Aspirin Version: March 2024  Aspirin  
CLASS:      Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) ACTIONS:   Inhibits the action of platelets preventing clot formation  INDICATIONS:  Acute coronary syndromes (ACS)/STEMI  CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    Allergy to Aspirin/NSAIDs  PRECAUTIONS:  History of GI bleeding/peptic ulcers Chronic kidney disease Trauma  SIDE EFFECTS:     Indegestion                  

--- PAGE 172 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 173 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Atropine Sulfate Version: March 2024  Atropine Sulfate  
CLASS:      Anticholinergic/Parasympathetic bloker ACTIONS:   Blocks acetylcholine receptors Accelerates atrial pacemaker cells Increases heart rate Inhibits secretions  INDICATIONS:  Symptomatic Bradycardia Organophosphate/nerve agent poisoning  CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    None  PRECAUTIONS:  Use with caution in acute MI Bradycardia due to hypothermia (warm first) Heart transplant 2nd Degree Type II or 3rd Degree heart block (ineffective) Glaucoma  SIDE EFFECTS:     Palpitations       Headache       Dry mouth       Blurred vision           

--- PAGE 174 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 175 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Calcium Chloride Version: March 2024  Calcium Chloride 
CLASS:      Electrolyte    ACTIONS:   Necessary for muscle contraction, particularly in the heart. Stabilizes the cardiac cell membrane in hyperkalemia.                 INDICATIONS:  Cardiac Arrest   Crush injury  Symptomatic Calcium channel blocker/Beta Blocker overdose  CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    Digoxin use  PRECAUTIONS:  May cause tissue necrosis. Use only large bore, easily flushing IV/IO to avoid extravasation  Given in combination with IV/IO sodium bicarbonate, calcium may precipitate into calcium carbonate – give via separate IV/IO sites or flush thoroughly (at least 20 mL) between medications.  SIDE EFFECTS:     Bradycardia       Hypotension       Dysrhythmias           

--- PAGE 176 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 177 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Dextrose 10%, 25% and 50% Version: March 2024  Dextrose 10%, 25% and 50% 
CLASS:      Carbohydrate ACTIONS:   Rapidly elevates blood glucose level  INDICATIONS:  Hypoglycemia  CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    None  PRECAUTIONS:  May cause tissue necrosis with extravasation. Use appropriate concentration (see below) and largest, most proximal IV access available. Ensure patency prior to infusion.    SIDE EFFECTS:  Local irritation           

--- PAGE 178 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 179 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Diphenhydramine (Benadryl) Version: March 2024  Diphenhydramine(Benadryl) 
CLASS:      Antihistamine, anticholinergic    ACTIONS:   Blocks histamine receptors Causes mild     sedation/drowsiness   INDICATIONS:                                              Allergic reaction     Sedation    Dystonic reaction           CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    None  PRECAUTIONS:  May cause sedation    SIDE EFFECTS:     Drowsiness  Chest tightness  Numbness at injection site (IM)   Palpitations  Blurred vision           

--- PAGE 180 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 181 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Epinephrine (Adrenaline) Version: March 2024  Epinephrine (Adrenaline)  
CLASS:      Vasopressor, Sympathomimetic, Catecholamine ACTIONS:   Increases cardiac contractility  Increases heart rate Increases peripheral vascular resistance Bronchodilation Reduces bronchial edema      INDICATIONS:     Anaphylaxis                                                      Cardiac arrest Respiratory distress & Stridor Hypotension Bradycardia (pediatric)   CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    None  PRECAUTIONS:  May induce tachyarrhythmias and/or ACS. Continuous monitoring of vitas is required. Monitoring of cardiac rhythm is also preferred.  Protect from exposure to light May cause tissue ischemia / necrosis with extravasation. Use proximal IV site (Antecubital or higher) and verify patency prior to IV administration/infusion.  SIDE EFFECTS: Anxiety  Palpitations  Tachycardia  Hypertension             

--- PAGE 182 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 183 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Etomidate (Amidate) Version: March 2024  Etomidate (Amidate) 
CLASS:      General anesthetic    ACTIONS:                                                                  Rapidly induces anesthesia (30 – 60 seconds)  DURATION OF ACTION: Five to ten minutes  INDICATIONS:  Rapid sequence induction  CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    Known hypersensitivity / allergy     PRECAUTIONS:                                                        Adrenal insufficiency                                                                                        May increase the risk of post-intubation hypotension Has no analgesic properties  SIDE EFFECTS:                                                         Hypotension                                                                                    Myoclonus                                                                                                                                     Nausea/ vomiting                    Nystagmus                   Local irritation          

--- PAGE 184 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 185 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Furosemide (Lasix) Version: March 2024  Furosemide (Lasix)  
CLASS:      Diuretic ACTIONS:   Inhibits reabsorption of sodium, chloride and water within the renal tubules, increasing urine output (diuresis).     INDICATIONS:       Respiratory distress with pulmonary edema      CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    Pregnancy Hypovolemia / dehydration Hypotension: SBP <110, MAP<65      PRECAUTIONS:     Protect from exposure to light Monitor vital signs closely for signs of over diuresis  (worsening tachycardia, hypotension)        SIDE EFFECTS:   Lightheadedness, dizziness, muscle cramps, dry mouth            

--- PAGE 186 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 187 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Glucagon Version: March 2024  Glucagon 
CLASS:      Hormone ACTIONS:   Breaks down stored glycogen to glucose, raising blood glucose level Increases heart rate/cardiac contractility (CCB overdose)   INDICATIONS:      Hypoglycemia Symptomatic Calcium channel blocker (CCB) overdose  Symptomatic Beta blocker (BB) overdose   CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    None in emergency use   PRECAUTIONS:  Requires adequate glycogen stores to be effective. May be           less effective or ineffective in patients with a history of alcoholism, chronic liver disease, and/or malnutrition as well as low birth weight neonates/infants.   SIDE EFFECTS:     Nausea, vomiting            

--- PAGE 188 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 189 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Haloperidol (Haldol) Version: March 2024  Haloperidol (Haldol)  
CLASS:      Antipsychotic    ACTIONS:       Dopamine antagonist, sedation  INDICATIONS:  Behavioral emergencies: Psychiatric, medical, or traumatic emergencies with behavior which poses a significant risk of harm to the patient or others   CONTRAINDICTATIONS:                                            Known allergy/hypersensitivity  Parkinson’s disease  Dementia (including Alzheimer’s disease)  CNS depression/Coma   PRECAUTIONS:  Patients with dementia-related psychosis who are treated with antipsychotic drugs are at an increased risk of death – Haldol is not approved for use in these patients.  Many drug-drug interactions, particularly with medications known to prolong the QT interval  May cause hypotension. Use with caution in patients with cardiac disease, ≥65 years old, or taking anti-arrhythmic medications. May lower seizure threshold – use only when benefit outweighs risk in patients with known seizure disorder. May cause dystonic reactions (abnormal involuntary movements) or muscle rigidity. May block the activity of epinephrine – use Norepinephrine if vasopressor is required.   SIDE EFFECTS:     Hypotension, bradycardia, flushing, dystonic reactions, drowsiness    

--- PAGE 190 ---
 
       This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 191 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Hydroxocobalamin (CYANOKIT) Version: March 2024      Hydroxocobalamin (CYANOKIT)     
   CLASS:      Cyanide Antidote     ACTIONS:       Binds Cyanide ions for excretion in urine   INDICATIONS:  Exposure to combustion products / fire in an enclosed space with altered mental status, seizures, hypotension and/or cardiac arrest  CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    None in emergency use   PRECAUTIONS:  Requires reconstitution (200mL 0.9% Sodium Chloride) Use vented IV tubing  May increase blood pressure: Caution in patients with severe hypertension.   SIDE EFFECTS:      Hypertension, deep red/purple discoloration of urine            

--- PAGE 192 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 193 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Ipratropium Bromide (Atrovent) Version: March 2024    Ipratropium Bromide (Atrovent)  
CLASS:      Anticholinergic, Inhaled parasympatholytic    ACTIONS:       Causes bronchodilation Dries respiratory secretions    INDICATIONS:      Respiratory Distress (Asthma/COPD), Inhalation Irritants    CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    Known hypersensitivity/allergy   PRECAUTIONS:  May exacerbate glaucoma–use only when benefit outweighs risk  May cause tachycardia – use with caution in patients with cardiac disease or ≥ 65 years old.    SIDE EFFECTS:   Cough, dry mouth, anxiety, palpitations, nausea, dizziness, headache, hypertension            

--- PAGE 194 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 195 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Ketamine (Ketalar) Version: March 2024  Ketamine (Ketlar) 
CLASS:                Dissociative anesthetic    ACTIONS:                 Analgesic, Dissociative / amnestic (sedation, induction of anesthesia)     INDICATIONS:  Behavioral emergencies: Psychiatric, medical, or traumatic emergencies with behavior which poses a significant risk of harm to the patient or others  Rapid sequence induction      CONTRAINDICTATIONS:   Know hypersensitivity/allergy.           Pre-induction shock index (HR/SBP) ≥ 1.  PRECAUTIONS:  May cause tachycardia/hypertension – use with caution in       patients with cardiac disease or ≥ 65 years old. Do not inject more than 5 mL per IM site. Use multiple sites simultaneously if necessary.  Emergence reactions (bizarre, agitated behavior) may occur as dissociation lifts. Benzodiazepines are generally effective. Sudden death following administration for behavioral emergencies has been reported. Close monitoring, including cardiac monitor, HR, blood pressure, and SpO2 should be initiated as soon as feasible.  Laryngospasm or apnea may occur, particularly with rapid IV push – administer slowly (over 1-2 minutes) and monitor airway closely following any administration  May increase the risk of post-intubation hypotension.  SIDE EFFECTS:   Tachycardia, hypersalivation, dizziness, vision changes, nausea, disorientation, drowsiness, hallucinations   

--- PAGE 196 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 197 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Ketorolac (Toradol) Version: March 2024  Ketorolac (Toradol) 
CLASS:      Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)     ACTIONS:       General pain contrl/analgesia Inhibits platelet function Antipyretic   INDICATIONS:     General Pain Management   CONTRAINDICTATIONS: Known hypersensitivity / allergy Bleeding disorders or history of internal bleeding (GI/CVA) Peptic ulcer disease  Chronic kidney disease  Pregnancy    PRECAUTIONS:               Anaphylaxis has been reported in patients with a history of Asthma.  May increase risk of bleeding – avoid use in patients with known or suspected active bleeding. Contact Medical Control before administering to patients with multisystem trauma.     SIDE EFFECTS:      Local reaction/irritation, indigestion, nausea     

--- PAGE 198 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 199 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Lidocaine 2% (Xylocaine) Version: March 2024  Lidocaine 2% (Xylocaine)  
 CLASS:      Antidysrhythmic, Anesthetic     ACTIONS:   Binds neuron sodium channels, prevention conduction(anesthetic)  Slows cardiac action potential, reducing ectopy (antidysrhythmic)   INDICATIONS:     Cardiac arrest: VT/VF refractory to defibrillation  Pain control: Intraosseous access      CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    Known hypersensitivity /allergy  Dysrhythmia due to local anesthetic toxicity  2nd or 3rd degree heart block PVCs with bradycardia (ventricular escape beats)  Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome Stokes-Adams Syndrome   PRECAUTIONS:  Monitor for CNS toxicity. Symptoms include slurred speech, facial numbness, decreased LOC, muscle twitches, seizure     SIDE EFFECTS:     Nausea, widening of QRS, seizure, hypotension            

--- PAGE 200 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 201 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Magnesium Sulfate Version: March 2024  Magnesium Sulfate 
CLASS:      Electrolyte    ACTIONS:       Antidysrhythmic (refractory VT/VF)  Anticonvulsant/CNS Depressant (Eclampsia)  Smooth Muscle Relaxant (COPD/Asthma)   INDICATIONS:      Respiratory Distress (Asthma/COPD)  Pre-eclampsia with severe features  Eclampsia VT/VF refractory defibrillation  Torsades de Pointes   CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    None in emergency use  PRECAUTIONS:  Rapid administration may lead to hypotension, respiratory depression and/or pulmonary edema. Administer no faster than 1g/min. Magnesium reduces cardiac contractility, use with caution in patients with decreased ejection fraction/CHF Note: If not premixed for infusion, add 4g Magnesium Sulfate to 100mL 0.9% Sodium Chloride or D5W. Final concentration = 40mg/mL.  SIDE EFFECTS:                  Vision changes, headache, flushing, breathing difficulty, bradycardia            

--- PAGE 202 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 203 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Methylprednisolone (Solu-Medrol) Version: March 2024  Methylprednisolone (Solu-Medrol) 
CLASS:      Synthetic corticosteroid    ACTIONS:       Reduces inflammation/bronchial edema    INDICATIONS:      Allergic reaction / Anaphylaxis  Respiratory distress   CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    Known hypersensitivity / allergy  Recent myocardial infarction  Sepsis/septic shock   PRECAUTIONS:  May exacerbate glaucoma, myasthenia gravis, hyperglycemia, and fluid retention due to CHF, kidney or liver disease. Use with caution in these patients and only when benefit outweighs risk.  SIDE EFFECTS:  Indigestion, nausea/vomiting (particularly with rapid administration) Headache, hypertension, fluid retention            

--- PAGE 204 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 205 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Midazolam (Versed) Version: March 2024  Midazolam (Versed) 
CLASS:      Benzodiazepine  ACTIONS:   CNS depressant     INDICATIONS:     Seizure Synchronized cardioversion (Mild sedation)  Behavioral Emergencies (Moderate sedation) Post-intubation management (Moderate sedation)     CONTRAINDICTATIONS:        Known Hypersensirivity/allergy   PRECAUTIONS:   Benzodiazepines are associated with a high risk of respiratory depression, coma, and death. Monitor airway, breathing and vital signs closely following any administration.    Due to the risk of apnea and respiratory arrest, use in combination with opioids only after an airway has been definitively secured and ability to ventilate adequately has been confirmed.  May cause or exacerbate hypotension, particularly in pediatric, underweight (<50kg), frail, elderly (≥65 years), or hemodynamically unstable patients. Use minimum dose necessary and only when potential benefit outweighs the risk. Paradoxical reactions (agitated/aggressive behavior) have been reported.   Half-life may be prolonged in patients with renal impairment.    SIDE EFFECTS:  Respiratory depression, hypotension, drowsiness, headache,  hiccups, vomiting      

--- PAGE 206 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 207 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Morphine Sulfate Version: March 2024  Morphine Sulfate 
CLASS:      Opioid analgesic ACTIONS:       General Analgesia Respiratory/CNS depression   INDICATIONS:     Analgesia/pain control   CONTRAINDICTATIONS:  Systolic BP < 100mmHg  Known allergy/hypersensitivity.   PRECAUTIONS:   Use lower doses and longer spacing between doses in frail, hypotensive, underweight, opiate naïve and elderly patients (>65 years). Due to the risk of apnea and respiratory arrest, use in combination with benzodiazepines only after an airway has been definitively secured and ability to ventilate adequately has been confirmed. May cause respiratory depression, bradycardia, hypotension – monitor vitals closely.  SIDE EFFECTS:      Dizziness, nausea, respiratory depression, hypotension          

--- PAGE 208 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 209 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Naloxone (Narcan) Version: March 2024  Naloxone (Narcan) 
CLASS:      Opiate/Opioid antagonist ACTIONS:   Reverses opiate effects  INDICATIONS:  Opiate/Opioid Overdose    CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    Allergy/hypersensitivity   PRECAUTIONS:  May induce immediate opiate withdrawal (nausea, vomiting, diaphoresis, generalized pain, tachycardia, agitation)  Support respirations while administering Naloxone.   SIDE EFFECTS:  Body aches, sweating, nervousness, diarrhea, nausea, abdominal cramps, tachycardia, hypertension, pulmonary edema            

--- PAGE 210 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 211 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Nitroglycerine (Nitrostat) Version: March 2024  Nitroglycerin (Nitrostat)  
CLASS:      Vasodilator ACTIONS:     Dilates coronary arteries  Systemic vasodilator        INDICATIONS:   Acute Coronary Syndromes (Pain management)      Respiratory distress due to pulmonary edema     CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    Hypotension: SBP <100mmHg or MAP <65 Use of PDE inhibitors (eg. Sildenafil, Vardenafil, Tadalafil) Allergy/Hypersensitivity  Children less than 12      PRECAUTIONS:     May cause significant drop in blood pressure.      SIDE EFFECTS:     Headache, dizziness, nausea, flushing, hypotension            

--- PAGE 212 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 213 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Norepinephrine (Levophed) Version: March 2024  Norepinephrine (Levophed) 
CLASS:      Vasopressor  ACTIONS:   Increase cardiac contractility   Increased peripheral vascular resistance.   INDICATIONS:  Hypotension/Shock  CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    None in emergency use  PRECAUTIONS:  May cause tissue ischemia/necrosis with extravasation. Use largest, most proximal IV access site available (antecubital or higher) and ensure patency prior to infusion. Monitor closely for signs of extravasation. Trauma: use of vasopressors increases bleeding. Consider only as a last resort when permissive hypotension and IV fluids have failed.  Correct non-sinus tachyarrhythmias prior to considering vasopressor.  SIDE EFFECTS:     Tachyarrhythmias, hypertension, bradycardia  Adult Norepinephrine IV Infusion Add 4 mg of norepinephrine to 250 mL of NS (final concentration 16 mcg/mL). Dosing 5 -20 mcg/min. Maximum 20 mcg/min = 75 gtt/min  mcg/min Gtt/min 60 drop set 5 mcg/min 19 6 mcg/min 22 7 mcg/min 26 8 mcg/min 30 9 mcg/min 34 10 mcg/min 37 12.5 mcg/min 47 15 mcg/min 56 17.5 mcg/min 65 20 mcg/min 75  

--- PAGE 214 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 215 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Odansetron (Zofran) Version: March 2024  Ondansetron (Zofran)  
CLASS:      Antiemetic ACTIONS:   Relieves nausea and vomiting     INDICATIONS:      Nausea and vomiting Pain management (prophylactic)    CONTRAINDICTATIONS:  Allergy/hypersensitivity  Prolonged QTc (>500ms)     PRECAUTIONS:     Less effective if used after vomiting has begun   SIDE EFFECTS:     QT prolongation Headache Drowsiness           

--- PAGE 216 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 217 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Rocuronium (Zemuron) Version: March 2024  Rocuronium (Zemuron)  
CLASS:      Non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocker / paralytic ACTIONS:   Rapidly binds to acetylcholine receptors leading to reversible paralysis (30 – 60 seconds)  DURATION OF ACTION: 30-60 MINUTES  INDICATIONS:  Rapid sequence induction  CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    Known hypersensitivity / allergy.  PRECAUTIONS:  PARALYZING AGENT. PATIENT MUST BE VENTILATED.  Anesthetic / induction agent must be given prior to paralytic when performing RSI.  Duration of action may be prolonged in patients with severe hypocalcemia/hypokalemia/hypermagnesemia, cachexia, acidosis, or myasthenia gravis.  Duration of action is longer than that of available sedatives / induction agents. Provide adequate analgesia / sedation to ensure patient safety and comfort.   SIDE EFFECTS:     Hypertension       Tachycardia        

--- PAGE 218 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 219 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Sodium Bicarbonate Version: March 2024  Sodium Bicarbonate  
CLASS:      Alkalinizing Agent, Electrolyte ACTIONS:   Buffers excess hydrogen ions (acidosis)  Stabilizes cardiac membrane (hyperkalemia)  Shifts potassium into cells (hyperkalemia)  Alkalinizes urine (crush syndrome)  INDICATIONS: Hyperkalemia: Cardiac arrest / Crush injury  Anti-cholinergic / TCA overdose Severe metabolic acidosis    CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    None in emergency use  PRECAUTIONS:  Sodium bicarbonate administration during cardiac arrest is not associated improved long-term survival and may be associated with higher mortality. Per the American Heart Association, it is not indicated for routine use during cardiac arrest. Given in combination with IV/IO calcium, bicarbonate may precipitate into calcium carbonate – give via separate IV/IO sites or flush thoroughly (at least 20 mL) between medications.  SIDE EFFECTS:     Pulmonary edema       Hypokalemia           

--- PAGE 220 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 221 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Fentanyl (Sublimaze) Version: March 2024  Fentanyl (Sublimaze) 
CLASS:      Synthetic opiate analgesic ACTIONS:   Analgesia and sedation     INDICATIONS:     Pain control Post-advanced airway analgesia/sedation  CONTRAINDICTATIONS:  Systolic BP < 100  Hypersensitivity/allergy  PRECAUTIONS:  Use lower doses (0.5 mcg/kg or less) and longer spacing between doses in frail, hypotensive, underweight, opiate naïve and elderly patients (> 65 years).  Due to the risk of apnea and respiratory arrest, use in combination with benzodiazepines only after an airway has been definitively secured and ability to ventilate adequately has been confirmed.  Rare cases of muscle/chest wall rigidity have been reported. Use lowest dose necessary and administer slowly.       SIDE EFFECTS:     Hypotension, respiratory depression, nausea          

--- PAGE 222 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 223 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Succinylcholine (Anectine) Version: March 2024  Succinylcholine (Anectine)  
CLASS:      Depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent / paralytic  ACTIONS:   Rapidly depolarizes skeletal muscle cells, causing them to briefly contract, followed by flaccid paralysis (30 – 45 seconds)     DURATION OF ACTION:   Five to ten minutes     INDICATIONS:                                                          Rapid sequence induction      CONTRAINDICTATIONS:                                          Hypersensitivity / allergy  Prior malignant hyperthermia   Muscular dystrophy Myopathies  Hyperkalemia (including up to 21 days after burn or crush injuries)          Stroke / spinal cord injury / denervation syndromes     PRECAUTIONS:                  PARALYZING AGENT. PATIENT MUST BE VENTILATED.  Anesthetic / induction agent must be given prior to paralytic when performing RSI.  May induce hyperkalemia leading to ventricular dysrhythmia and cardiac arrest.  Does not provide analgesia or amnesia.   SIDE EFFECTS:     Fasciculations / myoclonus Increased intraocular / intracranial pressure Dysrhythmias Malignant Hyperthermia        

--- PAGE 224 ---
 
        This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 225 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Vecuronium (Norcuron) Version: March 2024  Vecuronium (Norcuron) 
CLASS:      Non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocker / paralytic ACTIONS:   Rapidly binds to acetylcholine receptors leading to reversible paralysis (75-90 seconds)  DURATION OF ACTION: 30-60 MINUTES  INDICATIONS:  Rapid sequence induction  CONTRAINDICTATIONS:    Known hypersensitivity / allergy.  PRECAUTIONS:  PARALYZING AGENT. PATIENT MUST BE VENTILATED.  Anesthetic / induction agent must be given prior to paralytic when performing RSI.  Duration of action may be prolonged in patients with severe hypocalcemia/hypokalemia/hypermagnesemia, cachexia, acidosis, or myasthenia gravis.  Duration of action is longer than that of available sedatives / induction agents. Provide adequate analgesia / sedation to ensure patient safety and comfort.   SIDE EFFECTS:     Bradycardia (rare)        

--- PAGE 226 ---
 
         This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 227 ---
    
PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Ziprasidone (Geodon) Version: March 2024  Ziprasidone (Geodon) 
CLASS:      Anti-psychotic, sedative ACTIONS:   Inhibits synaptic reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine – potent sedative      INDICATIONS:     Behavioral Emergencies – severe agitation       CONTRAINDICTATIONS:                                           Known hypersensitivity / allergy. Recent history of cardiac arrhythmia / dysrhythmia Recent MI Severely reduced cardiac ejection fraction / heart failure Dementia-related psychosis        PRECAUTIONS:      Cardiovascular disease Hypotension or use of anti-hypertensive medications Hypovolemia Cerebrovascular disease Pregnancy   SIDE EFFECTS:  Hypotension, dizziness, syncope, QT-prolongation, Torsades de Pointes, nausea  NOTE: Will be provided as a substitute medication if Haloperidol (Haldol) is unavailable. For intramuscular (IM) use only. May cause QT prolongation – monitor cardiac rhythm following any administration.             

--- PAGE 228 ---
 
       This Page Intentionally Left Blank  

--- PAGE 229 ---
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures Version: 2015v0323 Procedures Table of Contents Page 1 of 1 Title..............................................................................................................................EffectiveDate12LeadECG.................................................................................................................................03/2023ADULTCardiopulmonaryResuscitation(CPR).............................................................................07/2022AirwayManagementandVentilatorySupportwithForeignBodyAirwayObstruction.............07/2022Capnography...............................................................................................................................07/2022ChestDecompression..................................................................................................................03/2022CPAP............................................................................................................................................03/2023EndotrachealIntubation..............................................................................................................07/2022IntraosseousAccess.....................................................................................................................03/2022MedicalDevicesandPumps........................................................................................................07/2022MedicationAdministration..........................................................................................................03/2022NasogastricTubeInsertion..........................................................................................................03/2022NeonatalResuscitation................................................................................................................03/2023PEDIATRICCardiopulmonaryResuscitation(CPR).......................................................................07/2022SpinalMotionRestriction............................................................................................................03/2022SurgicalAirway............................................................................................................................03/2022TaserBarbRemoval.....................................................................................................................03/2022TourniquetApplication................................................................................................................03/2022TranscutaneousPacing................................................................................................................03/2022
Procedures Table of Contents 

--- PAGE 230 ---
ThisPageIntentionallyLeftBlank

--- PAGE 231 ---
12-Lead Electrocardiogram (ECG) 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2014v0323 Procedure: 12-Lead ECG Page 1 of 4 INDICATIONS Asindicatedbyanyofthefollowingprotocols:o AllergicReaction/Anaphylaxiso Bradycardia(Symptomatic)o ChestPain(Cardiac)o CrushInjurieso HypotensionandShocko Overdose/Poisoning/ToxicIngestiono Post-CardiacArrestCare(ROSC)o Seizureo Tachyarrhythmias Anywitnessedorreportedsyncope,alteredmentalstatus,respiratorydistress,and/oranyconditionorpresentationwhichraisessuspicionforanacutecoronarysyndrome,cardiacischemia,ordysrhythmia.PROCEDUREEMTPrepareandpoweronthecardiacmonitor,connect12-Leadcables,andattachelectrodes.EMTEMTApplyextremityleads: RA(white)torightarm LA(red)toleftarm RL(green)torightleg LL(black)toleftlegEMTEMTExposethechestandapplyprecordialleads(seeimagebelow): V1to4thintercostalspaceatrightsternalborder V2to4thintercostalspaceatleftsternalborder V3midwaybetweenV2andV4 V4to5thintercostalspaceatleftmidclavicularline V5levelwithV4atleftanterioraxillaryline V6levelwithV5atleftmidaxillarylineEMTEMTInputthepatient’sageandsex,instructthepatienttoremainstill,andacquiretheECG.EMTEMTIfnoEMT-IorParamedicisavailabletoassesstheECG,orifitisinterpretedbyanEMT-IorParamedictorepresentanacutecardiacemergency(e.g.acutedysrhythmia),transmittheECGtothemostappropriatefacilityandnotifyMedicalControlthatanECGhasbeentransmitted.EMTEMTIfthe12-LeadECGreads“STEMI”or“ACUTEMI,”transmittheECGtotheclosestPCIcapablehospital.Notifythereceivingfacilityofa“Pre-HospitalSTEMIAlert.”FollowChestPain(Cardiac)protocol.EMTEMTProvideacopy(printedorelectronic)oftheECG(s)tothereceivingfacilityorHEMScrew.Ensurepatientname,DOB,andtimeacquiredareprovidedontheprintedECG.AttachadigitalcopyoftheECGtothepatientcarereport.EMTMCIfthe12-LeadECGisatypicalorindeterminate,thereishighsuspicionforcardiacischemia,orthereisconcernforanacutecardiacemergency,transmittheECGtothemostappropriatefacilityandcontactMedicalControlforguidance.MC

--- PAGE 232 ---
12-Lead Electrocardiogram (ECG) 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2014v0323 Procedure: 12-Lead ECG Page 4 of 4 PEARLS• Drywithatowelorshavethechestasneededifelectrodeswillnotadhereorsignalcannotbecaptured.• Considerpatientprivacy,modesty,andculturalpreferences.Considermovingoutofpublicviewpriortoremovingclothing.• Signsofischemia(includingS-Televation)cannotbeaccuratelyoradequatelyassessedvia2-or4-LeadECG.A12-LeadECGisrequiredtoassessforischemia.• Ifa12-LeadECGhasbeentransmittedandthenapatientrefusalisbeingobtained,considercontactingmedicalcontroltoensuretherearenoadditionalfindingswhichthepatientmayrequiretomakeaninformeddecision.• TheinitialECGsmaynotshowischemia.Whenthereishighsuspicionforcardiacischemia,obtainserialECGs(approx.10minutesapart)toassessforchangesandthedevelopmentofsignsofischemia.• Ifpossible,obtaina12-LeadECGpriortothereleaseofacrushinjuryfollowedbyserialECGsoncereleased.• IntermediateandParamedicprovidersmayinterpreta12-LeadECGasSTEMIifdiagnosticcriteriaismet:o SymptomsconsistentwithanacutecoronarysyndromeormyocardialinfarctionANDo ≥1mmSTsegmentelevationintwoormorecontiguousleads• EMT-IandParamedic:Ifthereis>1mmSTelevationinleadsII,III,and/orV1,andtheECGreadsSTEMI/ACUTEMI,considerobtainingaright-sided(V4R)ECG.Seediagrambelowforleadplacement.TransmitandconsultmedicalcontrolpriortoadministeringNitroglycerine.o STelevation>1mminleadV4Rishighlysensitiveforrightventricularinfarction.o Patientswithacuterightventricularinfarctionarehighlypreloaddependent.AvoidnitratesunlessspecificallyorderedbyMedicalControl.• ARight-sided12-LeadECG(V4R)&Posterior12-LeadECG(V8&V9)togetherconstitutea15-LeadECG:o V4R-(formerlyV4)5thintercostalspaceatmidclavicularlineonthepatient’srightsideo V8-(formerlyV5)6thintercostalspaceleftposterioratmidscapularlineo V9-(formerlyV6)6thintercostalspaceleftatparaspinouslineo Labelthesecond12-LeadECGtoreflectthenewleads:V4asV4R,V5asV8,andV6asV9

--- PAGE 233 ---
12-Lead Electrocardiogram (ECG) 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2014v322 Procedure: 12-Lead ECG Page 4 of 4 StandardPrecordialLeadPlacement
V4RPrecordialLeadPlacement(“Right-sided”ECG)


--- PAGE 234 ---
12-Lead Electrocardiogram (ECG) 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2014v323 Procedure: 12-Lead ECG Page 4 of 4 V4RPrecordialLeadPlacement(“Posterior”ECG)


--- PAGE 235 ---
ADULT Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2022v0722 Procedures: Adult Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Page 1 of 3 CRITERIA Patientunresponsive,withoutpalpablepulseorrespiration(excludingagonalbreaths). Patientswithobviousdeath(rigormortis,lividity,decomposition,orinjuriesinconsistentwithsurvival)areexcluded.PROTOCOLEMRFollowGeneral–UniversalPatientCare/InitialPatientContactprotocol.EMREMRDetermineDNRstatus.RefertoDeath&CriteriaforWithholdingResuscitationprotocol.EMREMRBeginchestcompressions.Pushhardandfast.Allowfullchestrecoil.Limitpausesto<10sec.Depth:Atleast2inchesdeepRate:100–120bpmAdult:Fingerinterlocked,mid-chestonthesternumEMREMRAdminister100%oxygen.Donotover-ventilate.Maintaincompression-ventilationratio30:2untiladvancedairwayisestablished,thenadministeronebreatheverysixseconds.Ifrespiratorypathogenissuspected,considerearlyintubationandHEPAfilteredventilation(I/Ponly).EMREMRApplyAED/Assesscardiacrhythmevery2minutes.IfAEDisadvisingtoshockorrhythmisVForVT(asdeterminedbyEMT-IorP)defibrillateatmaximumjoules,thenrefertoCardiacArrest:VentricularFibrillation/PulselessVentricularTachycardiaprotocol.IfAEDisadvisingnoshockorrhythmisasystoleorPEA(asdeterminedbyEMT-IorP),continueCPRthenrefertoCardiacArrest:Asystole/PulselessElectricalActivityprotocol.EMREMRAlternatecompressorsevery2minutesorsooneriffatigued.ConsidermechanicalCPRdevice,ifavailable.EMREMTMonitorETCO2.IfETCO2<10ordropping,reassessandoptimizecompressionrate,depth,andrecoil.EMTEMRIfROSCisachieved,refertoPostCardiacArrestCare(ROSC)protocol.EMRMCIfROSCisnotachieved,refertoDeathandCriteriaforWithholdingResuscitationprotocol.Note:Onceinitiated,terminationofresuscitativeeffortsisaMedicalControldecisiononly.MC

--- PAGE 236 ---
ADULT Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2022v0722 Procedures: Adult Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Page 2 of 3 PEARLSCompressions:• Pushhardandfast:rate100–120bpm.Allowcompletechestrecoil.• Minimizeinterruptionsinchestcompressions.• Changecompressorevery2minutesorsooneriffatigued.• Givecontinuouscompressionswithadvancedairway.• UsequantitativeETCO2monitoringwithBVMo IfETCO2<10mmHg,improvechestcompressionso IfsuddenincreaseinETCO2isnoted(above30-40mmHg),checkpulseandrhythmforROSC.Airway:• Avoidexcessiveventilation.Considersupraglotticairway(BIAD)orendotrachealintubation.(EMT)• StudiestodatehavenotshownaclearimprovementinoutcomeswithSGAvsintubation–donotcompromisechestcompressionsforintubation.• UseETCO2toconfirmandmonitorplacementofanyadvancedairway.• ContinuallymonitorETCO2withtargetabove10mmHgduringCPRand35-45mmHgifROSCisachieved.• InpostROSCpatient,ifETCO2fallsbelow20mmHgorsignalislost,immediatelyreassesspulsesandairway.Defibrillation:• Ensurepadplacementisoptimal.Adjustpadsifshockablerhythmisrefractorytoelectricaltherapy.ConsiderAnterior/Posteriorplacement.• Usemaximumjoulessettingforadultdefibrillation.Reversiblecauses:Identifyandtreatperappropriateprotocolandscopeofpractice: Hypoxia•Tensionpneumothorax HyperkalemiaorHypokalemia•Tamponade(Cardiac) Hypothermia•Thrombosis(Cardiac,Pulmonary) Hypovolemia•Toxins Hydrogenion(acidosis) Hypoglycemiaorhyperglycemia• Trauma• Tablets(DrugOverdose)TerminationofResuscitation(TOR): RefertoDeath&CriteriaforWithholdingResuscitationprotocol. TerminationofresuscitativeeffortsisaMedicalControldecisiononly. ConsidercontactingMedicalControltorequestTORifthearrestwasnotwitnessedbyEMSandafter20minutesofcontinuousCPR:1) Therehasbeennoreturnofspontaneouscirculation(ROSC).AND2) Noshocksweredelivered.

--- PAGE 237 ---
ADULT Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2022v0722 Procedures: Adult Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Page 3 of 3 AHAADULTCPRALGORITHM(Forreferenceonly)


--- PAGE 238 ---
ThisPageIntentionallyLeftBlank

--- PAGE 239 ---
Airway Management and Ventilatory Support 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2022v0722 Procedures: Airway Management and Ventilatory Support Page 1 of 2 CRITERIA• Hypoxia(SpO2<94%)• Respiratorydistressorfailure• Acuteorimpendingairwayobstruction(expandinghematoma,edema,massorotherobstruction)• Inabilitytomaintainapatentairway(duetosecretions,blood,vomit,traumaetc)• Alteredlevelofconsciousnesswithineffective/inadequatespontaneousrespirationsPROTOCOLEMRFollowUniversalPatientCare/InitialPatientContactprotocol.EMREMRRefertoappropriateprotocol(e.g.RespiratoryDistress)forconditionspecifictherapyguidelines.EMREMRProvidesuctioningasneededtomaintainpatentairway.EMRCONSCIOUSPATIENTEMTForeignbodyairwayobstruction:*ADULT:PerformHeimlichabdominalthrusts.OBESE/PREGNANT:Performchestthrusts.PEDIATRIC≥1year:PerformHeimlichabdominalthrusts.PEDIATRIC<1year:Alternate5backblows/chestthrustsuntilobstructionclearsEMTEMTProvide/titratesupplementaloxygenviaNCorNRBtomaintainSpO294–98%.UseEtCO2monitortoguidetherapy.RefertoCapnographyprocedure.EMTEMTConsiderCPAP(PEEP:5cmH2O)forrespiratorydistress.RefertoCPAPprocedure.I/Ponly:AdjustPEEPtosupportventilationandworkofbreathing,upto10cmH2O.**EMTUNCONSCIOUS/OBTUNDEDPATIENTEMTPositionthepatientandopentheairway.UseBLSairwayadjuncts(OPA/NPA/SGA)asnecessary.EMTEMTSupportrespirationswithBVM.Usein-lineEtCO2.RefertoCapnographyprocedure.Adjusttidalvolume,respiratoryrate,and/orPEEP(ifavailable)tomaintainEtCO235–45mmHg.**EMTIForeignbodyairwayobstruction:Ifunabletoventilate,performlaryngoscopy.Removewithforceps.IIIfapneicand≥12yearsold:Considerendotrachealintubationifunabletoventilateadequatelybylessinvasivemeans.FollowEndotrachealIntubationprocedure.IPIfapneicand<12yearsold:considerendotrachealintubationifunabletoventilateadequatelybylessinvasivemeans.FollowEndotrachealIntubationprocedure.****P

--- PAGE 240 ---
Airway Management and Ventilatory Support 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2022v0722 Procedures: Airway Management and Ventilatory Support Page 2 of 2 PEARLS• CPAPisaRedDotProcedureforALLEMSCertificationlevels• BVMuse:Two-persontechniqueispreferredandgenerallymoreeffectivevsonepersontechnique.Oraland/ornasalairwaytools(OPA/NPA)shouldbeusedwithBVMtoimproveventilationandpreventgastricinsufflation.AnaverageadultBVMhasacapacityof1,600mL–morethandoublethephysiologicadulttidalvolume.Fullysqueezingthebagwillover-ventilatethepatient.Over-ventilationwithBVMsignificantlyincreasestheriskofaspiration,hypotension,pneumothorax,andothermajorcomplications.TheAICmaydelegateairwaymanagementbutmustkeepinmindthatappropriateBVMuserequiresexperienceandathoroughunderstandingofcardio-pulmonaryphysiology.AlthoughtheAICmustmaintainsituationalawarenessandprovidesupervisionofairwaymanagement,ensuringsafeandeffectiveairwaymanagementistheresponsibilityofALLproviderscaringforthepatient.• *Foreignbodyairwayobstruction:PerformHeimlichabdominalthrustsstandingbehindthepatientwithfistmidline,belowxiphoidprocessandabovenavel.Performadultchestthrustsstandingbehindthepatientwithfistmidlineagainstthesternumorsupinewithpalmagainstthesternum.Performbackblowsandchestthrustswithinfantpositionedproneorsupine,headdown,belowlevelofthechest.• **Caution:Avoidoverventilationinpatientswithobstructiveairwaydisease(e.g.COPD,asthma).Allowlongerexhalationtimeandconsiderpermissivehypercapnia(ETCO2>45mmHg)topreventbreathstacking.• Caution:Suddenorpersistenthypotensioninpatientsreceivingpositivepressureventilationmaybeduetoincreasedintrathoracicpressureduetobreathstackingand/ortensionpneumothorax.Assessforpneumothoraxandperformneedlethoracostomyifindicated.AdjustPEEP(lowornone),respiratoryrate(low)and/orvolume(low).ConsiderIVfluidbolusand/orvasopressor.Ifbreathstackinghasoccurredinpatientswithobstructiveairwaydisease,disconnectBVMandallowpatienttoexhale.• Caution:AvoidaspirationwhenusingCPAP.Useonlyonconsciousandalertpatients.Removethemaskimmediatelyifthepatientbeginstovomit.ConsiderRSI,ifavailable.• Caution:Avoidunrecognizedadvancedairwaydislodgement.Onceaninvasiveairway(BIAD/SGA,ETtubeorsurgicalairway)isinplace,continuousbox-waveformETCO2signalmustbeensuredthroughouttreatmentandtransport.Anyconcernforairwaydislodgementshouldimmediatelybeaddressed.Immediatere-visualizationofendotrachealtubeplacement(viadirectorvideolaryngoscopy)isrequiredforanylossofbox-waveformsignal,suddendropinSpO2,difficultyventilatingorotherconcernfordislodgement.• Caution:Avoidhypoxiaandhypotension.Manyconditionsresultinsignificantlyworseoutcomesifeventransientepisodeshypoxiaand/orhypotensionoccur.Extremecaremustbetakentoensurehypoxiaandhypotensionarenotinducedduringairwaymanagement,particularlyendotrachealintubation.Positivepressureventilationhasmajoreffectsoncardiacpreloadandmayworsenorinducehypotensioninpatientssufferingoratriskofpreloadreduction.Similarly,pneumothoraxmaybeworsenedorinducedbyuseofpositivepressureventilation.Closemonitoringfordeteriorationandrapidinterventionarerequiredforpatientsatriskoflunginjury.• ***Note:Pre-hospitalendotrachealintubationofpediatricpatientsispoorlysupportedbytheavailablescientificliteratureandshouldbereservedforlife-threateningsituationsinwhichlessinvasivemeansofoxygenation/ventilationhavebeenattemptedorconsideredandfoundtobenotfeasible.Inallcases,theproviderwiththemostexperiencedwithpediatricairwaymanagementshouldperformtheprocedure.ArobusttrainingandskillmaintenanceprogramwithinvolvementoftheagencyMedicalDirectorandanagency-levelsystemofcontinuousqualityimprovement(CQI)/qualityassurance(QA)arehighlyrecommendedforagencieselectingtoincludepediatricintubationasaprocedure.

--- PAGE 241 ---
Capnography
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2015v0722 Procedures: Capnography Page 1 of 2 INDICATIONS• Anypatientforwhomcontinuousmonitoringofrespiratoryeffort,ventilation,and/orperfusionisrequired.• Continuousmonitoringofend-tidalCO2capnographyismandatoryforanypatientwithanendotrachealtubeorsupraglotticairwaydeviceinplace.CapnographyisaRedDotProcedureforEMTPROCEDUREEMTAdequaterespiratoryeffort:ApplyETCO2samplingnasalcannulatopatient.EMTEMTInadequaterespiratoryeffort/Apnea:AttachinlineETCO2samplingdevicetoBVM,CPAP,orventilator.EMTEMTContinuouslymonitorreadingandwaveform.Refertowaveformguidebelow.EMTEMTAdvancedairway(ETT/SGA):ContinuousmonitoringETCO2waveformisrequiredatalltimes.AnysuddendroporlossofETCO2signalmustbeaddressedimmediately,beginningwithreverificationofairwaydeviceplacementandadequateventilation.EMTEMTCardiacArrest:IfETCO2<10ordroppingduringCPR,optimizecompressionrate,depth,andrecoil.IfROSCisachieved,adjustventilationtomaintainETCO2of35-45mmHg.Donothyperventilate.EMTEMTHeadInjury/TBI/Stroke:AdjustventilationtomaintainETCO2of35-45mmHg.Donothyperventilate.EMTEMTObstructiveairwaydisease(Asthma/COPD):Considerpermissivehypercapnia.Prioritizeoxygenation.EMTPEARLS• Ingeneral,anETCO2<20suggestsinadequatepulmonaryperfusion(e.g.hypotension/pulmonaryembolism)and/orseveremetabolicderangement(e.g.diabeticketoacidosis).• IfusinganinlineHEPAfilter,attachtheinlineETCO2samplingdeviceproximaltotheHEPAfilter(closertothepatient).• Withhigh-qualityCPR,ETCO2mayconsistentlybemeasuredinthenormalrange.AssessforROSCifasuddenriseinETCO2isnoted(e.g.12mmHgto35mmHg).• AchievingnormalETCO2levelsmaynotbepossibleforpatientswithchronicobstructiveairwaydisease(asthma/COPD),particularlyduringacuteexacerbations.Utilizebronchodilatorstoimproveventilationwhennecessaryand,ifusingassisted/mechanicalventilation,considerpermissivehypercapnia(upto90mmHg)toreducetheriskofbreath-stacking.

--- PAGE 242 ---
Capnography
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2015v0722 Procedures: Capnography Page 2 of 2 


--- PAGE 243 ---
ChestDecompression
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2012v00322 Procedures: Chest Decompression with Needle Page 1 of 1 INDICATIONS•Unilateralorbilateralneedledecompression:Cardiacarrest,hypotension,clinicalsignsofshock,orpoorperfusionANDabsentordecreasedbreathsounds.•Bilateralneedledecompression:Cardiacarrestwithevidenceofsignificantbluntorpenetratingthoracoabdominaltrauma.PROCEDUREIAdministeroxygenat15LPM(100%FiO2).IILocatethesecondintercostalspaceinthemid-clavicularlineonthesamesideasthesuspectedpneumothorax.Cleansethesite.Alternateacceptableposition:Fourthintercostalspace,midaxillaryline.IIAttacha10mLsyringefilledwith0.9%SodiumChloridetoa14-gaugecatheterneedle–uselongestavailable.Aspiratethesyringewhileadvancingovertherib,perpendiculartotheskin,andintothepleuralspaceuntilapopisfeltorair/blood/fluidisfreelyaspirated.Donotadvancetheneedlefurther.IIAdvancethecatheterovertheneedleintothepleuralspaceandremovetheneedle.IIReassessthepatient,includingvitalsignsandrespiratoryeffort/compliance.Considerrepeatingtheabovestepsforcontinuedorrecurrenthemodynamicinstability.IPEARLS•Needledecompressionisknowntohaveafailurerateofupto50%duetokinkingofthecatheter,displacement,lackofpenetrationintothepleuralspace,orobstruction.Usethelongest14-gaugecatheteravailable.Iftheinitialattemptfailstoreturnanyair/blood/fluid,considerasecondattemptinthesamesiteoratanalternatesite(lateral)onthesameside.•Iftheinitialprocedureproducestransientclinicalimprovement,followedbyclinicaldeterioration,considerrepeatingtheprocedureasair/bloodmayhavereaccumulated.•Onceneedledecompressionisperformed,itmustbeassumedthatthepatienthasapneumothorax,regardlessofair/blood/fluidreturn.Usecautionwhenventilatingthepatient,aspositivepressureventilationmayexacerbatethepneumothorax,leadingthehemodynamicinstability/collapse.

--- PAGE 244 ---
ThisPageIntentionallyLeftBlank

--- PAGE 245 ---
CPAP/BiPAP/PEEP 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2014v0323 Procedures: CPAP Page 1 of 2 INDICATIONS• Anyadultpatientwithrespiratorydistressduetopulmonaryedema,infection,near-drowningetc.• Usewithcautionforpatientsexperiencingrespiratorydistressduetoasthma/COPD.• Signsofrespiratorydistressinclude:o Accessorymuscleuse/retractiono SpO2lessthan94%o Respiratoryrategreaterthan24o Inabilitytospeakincompletesentences.CONTRAINDICATIONS• Apnea/agonalrespirations• Decreasedlevelofconsciousness(GCS≤13)• Pneumothorax• Facialtrauma,burns,orrecentsurgery• Penetratingneckand/orchesttrauma• Activevomiting/severenausea• Hypotension(SBP<90mmHg,MAP<65)• InabilitytotoleratetightfittingmaskPROCEDUREEMTEnsureadequateoxygensupplytotheCPAPdevice.Explaintheprocedureandindicationstothepatient.EMTEMTSetpositiveandexpiratorypressure(PEEP)to5mmHgEMTEMTPlacethemaskoverthemouthandnosewithoxygenflowing.Securewithstraps,beginningwiththelowerstraps.Tightenuntilair-leakisminimal.EMTEMTReassessthepatient,includingtheSpO2,ETCO2,andworkofbreathing.EMTEMTConsidertitratingPEEP9%-15mmHg)asneededtoimproveventilation/workofbreathing.EMTCPAP,BiPAP,andPEEPareREDDOTproceduresatallEMSCertificationLevels

--- PAGE 246 ---
CPAP/BiPAP/PEEP 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2014v0323 Procedures: CPAP Page 2 of 2 PEARLS• EarlyuseofCPAPforpatientswithrespiratorydistresshasbeenshowntoreducetheneedforintubationandimprovepatientoutcomes.• Positivepressureventilationgenerallydoesnotaddresstheunderlyingcauseofrespiratorydistress.Treatmentoftheunderlyingcauseisofcriticalimportance,suchasbronchodilatorsforobstructivelungdiseaseorpreloadreductionforcongestiveheartfailure.• Caution:Suddenorpersistenthypotensioninpatientsreceivingpositivepressureventilationmaybeduetoincreasedintrathoracicpressureduetobreathstackingand/ortensionpneumothorax.Assessforpneumothoraxandperformneedlethoracostomyifindicated.AdjustPEEP(lowornone),respiratoryrate(low)and/orvolume(low).ConsiderIVfluidbolusand/orvasopressor.Ifbreathstackinghasoccurredinpatientswithobstructiveairwaydisease,disconnectBVMandallowpatienttoexhale.• Caution:AvoidaspirationwhenusingCPAP.Useonlyonconsciousandalertpatients.Removethemaskimmediatelyifthepatientbeginstovomit.ConsiderRSI,ifavailable.• Caution:Avoidhypoxiaandhypotension.Manyconditionsresultinsignificantlyworseoutcomesifeventransientepisodeshypoxiaand/orhypotensionoccur.Extremecaremustbetakentoensurehypoxiaandhypotensionarenotinducedduringairwaymanagement,particularlyendotrachealintubation.Positivepressureventilationhasmajoreffectsoncardiacpreloadandmayworsenorinducehypotensioninpatientssufferingoratriskofpreloadreduction.Similarly,pneumothoraxmaybeworsenedorinducedbyuseofpositivepressureventilation.Closemonitoringfordeteriorationandrapidinterventionarerequiredforpatientsatriskoflunginjury.

--- PAGE 247 ---
EndotrachealIntubation
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures \Procedures: Endotracheal Intubation  CRITERIA•Respiratoryfailureorrespiratoryarrest•Acuteorimpendingairwayobstruction•Inabilitytomaintainapatentairway•AlteredlevelofconsciousnesswithineffectiveorinadequatespontaneousrespirationsPROTOCOLEMRFollowUniversalPatientCare/InitialPatientContactprotocol.EMREMTPre-oxygenatethepatient:Provide100%OxygenviaNRBorBVMfor3minutes.MonitorSpO2.RefertoAirwayManagementandVentilatorySupportprotocol.EMTEMTPositionthepatient:Eartosternalnotch.Maintainin-linecervicalspinestabilizationifthereisconcernfortrauma.EMTIPrepareequipment:o IV/IOaccesso ETtubeofappropriatesize+1sizebelowo Styletorbougieo OxygenONo SuctionONo Laryngoscopeo Backupairway(e.g.Supraglotticairwaydevice)o BVMwithETCO2monitorattachedIIOrallyintubate.Patients12yearsandolder.Advancelaryngoscopeinthemidline,identifyingairwaystructuresprogressively.Ensuretubeandcuffarevisualizedpassingthroughthevocalcords.IPOrallyIntubate.Patients<12yearsold.PIIfunsuccessful,reoxygenatebetweenattemptswith100%Oxygen.Adjustpositioning/technique/equipmentasnecessarypriortoanyfurtherattempt.Aftertwofailedattempts,airwaymustbemanagedbythemostexperiencedprovideravailable.IPIfunabletointubateandunabletooxygenate,proceedimmediatelytoSurgicalAirway.PIVerifyplacement.o Ensurethepresenceofcontinuousbox-waveformcapnography.o Auscultateforbilaterallungsounds&absenceofgastricsoundsIISecurethetube.Usetapeorcommercialtubeholder.Documentthedepthofplacement.IIAdministeranalgesia/sedation,asneededforpatientsafetyandcomfort.RefertotheSedationPostAdvancedAirwayProtocol.IEMTMonitorETtubeplacementandventilationwithSpO2andContinuousboxwaveformETCO2EMT

--- PAGE 248 ---
EndotrachealIntubation
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures \Procedures: Endotracheal Intubation  PEARLS•Assumeallintubationstobepotentiallydifficultandprepareassuch.• ETCO2monitoringwithacontinuousbox-waveformwhileintubatedistheacceptednationalstandardofcare.Withoutexception,afteranypatientisintubated,continuousmonitoringofETCO2isexpectedandisthesharedresponsibilityofeveryonecaringforthepatient.• Optimalde-nitrogenationandpre-oxygenationcansignificantlyextendthesafeapneatime.Provideatleast3minutesof100%FiO2viaNRBorBVMpriortoinitiatinganintubationprocedure.•Considerapneicoxygenationvianasalcanulaat15LPMthroughouttheprocedure.•Addressunstablevitalsigns(hypotensionorunstabletachycardia/bradycardia)priortointubation.• Non-cardiacarrestpatients:Shockindexhasbeenshowntoaccuratelypredictpost-intubationhypotension(PIH)andcardiacarrest.Shockindexiscalculatedasheartratedividedbysystolicbloodpressure(HR/SBP).Normalvaluesrangefrom0.5-0.7.Valuesgreaterthan1.0aresuggestiveofalowcardiacoutputstate–thesepatientsmayrequireresuscitationpriortoendotrachealintubation.NormalshockindexdoesnotnegatethepossibilityofPIH.Example:Heartrate70,Bloodpressure120/70.HR/SBP=70/120=SI0.58Example:Heartrate130,Bloodpressure100/50.HR/SBP=130/100=SI1.3Note:“Permissivehypotension”(SBP80-90mmHg,adjustedformentalstatus)ispreferredwhenmanagingpatientswithhemorrhagicshock(trauma,GIbleed,etc).Intubationshouldbeavoidedinthesepatientswheneverpossibleduetohighriskofpost-intubationhypotensionandcardiacarrest.• Leadwithsuction:Videolaryngoscopesarepronetobeingobscuredbyvomit,bloodand/orsecretionsintheairway.“Leadwithsuction”referstoplacingsuctionintothemouthfirst,clearingawayanysuchsecretionspriortoadvancingthelaryngoscope.• Caution:Avoiddeepplacementofthelaryngoscope.Ingeneral,curvedlaryngoscopesaredesignedtobeusedwiththetipinthevallecula.Overlydeepplacementcanresultinvomitingandincreasedriskofaspiration,difficultypassingthebougie/tubethroughthevocalcords,andunintentionaltraumatodelicateairwaystructuressuchasthevocalcords.Ifthebladeisunintentionallyplacedbelowthevallecula,itisrecommendedtoslidebackuntiltheepiglottisdropsintoviewandthenrepositionintothevallecularspace.• Patienthandoff:Inadditiontostandardpatienthand-offinformation,informEDteamonarrivalofindicationforintubation,sizeofETtube,depthoftubemeasuredatteeth,currentPEEPsetting,ETCO2rangepost-intubation,medicationsgivenandanyotherpertinentclinicalinformation.• IfperformingRSI:Etomidatehasminimalintrinsiceffectonhemodynamicsandisthepreferredinductionagentinmostcases.Ketaminemayincreasetheriskofpost-intubationhypotension,particularlyinpatientswithtachycardia.Ketaminedoeshavesomeeffectasabronchodilatorandmaybepreferredforpatientswithacuterespiratorydistressduetoasthma,COPD,anaphylaxisetc.Inallcases,notifythereceivingfacilityofRSImedicationsadministered,includingdoseandtimegivenWhenexactweightisnotknown,useofalength-basedtape(e.g.Broslowtape)isrequiredforsizingpediatricequipment.CuffedETtubesizeshouldapproximate(Age/4)+3.5.•*Note:Pre-hospitalendotrachealintubationofpediatricpatientsispoorlysupportedbytheavailablescientificliteratureandshouldbereservedforlife-threateningsituationsinwhichlessinvasivemeansofoxygenation/ventilationhavebeenattemptedorconsideredandfoundtobenotfeasible.Inallcases,theprovidermostexperiencedwithpediatricairwaymanagementshouldperformtheprocedure.Arobusttrainingandskillmaintenanceprogramwithinvolvementoftheagencymedicaldirectorandanagency-levelsystemofcontinuousqualityimprovement(CQI)/qualityassurance(QA)arehighlyrecommendedforagencieselectingtoincludepediatricintubationasaprocedure.

--- PAGE 249 ---
Intraosseous(IO)Access
RegionalPatientCareProtocols,Policies&ProceduresMarch2024Procedures: Intraosseous Access Page 1 of 2 INDICATIONS•IntraosseousaccessisindicatedforanypatientinextremisrequiringimmediatemedicationadministrationandIVaccesscannotbereadilyobtained(90secondsortwofailedattempts).PROCEDUREALocateanappropriateinsertionsite.Avoidinsertionthroughinfectedtissueandintobonesuspectedtobefractured.Cleansethesitewithanalcoholpadordisinfectantswab.• Proximalhumerus:Internallyrotatethearmandlocatethegreatertubercleapproximately2fingerbreadthsabovethehumeralneck.Approachfromthesideata45°angle.• Proximaltibia:2-3fingerbreathsbelowthePatellaand2fingerbreadthsmedialalongtheflataspectoftheTibia.AAInserttheIOneedleintotheselectedsitewiththeneedleperpendiculartothebonesurfaceuntiltheneedletiptouchesthebone.Confirmatleastoneblacklineontheneedleisvisibleabovetheskin.AAPenetratethebonebysqueezingthedriver’striggerandapplygentle,steady,downwardpressure.Releasethetriggerwhenalossofresistanceisfeltuponentryintothemedullaryspace.AAStabilizethecatheterhubandremovethedriverfromtheneedle.Removethestyletbyturningcounterclockwise.Disposeofthestyletinanappropriatecontainerforsharpbiohazards.AASecuretheneedleandattachprimedextensiontubingtotheLuer-lock.Ifthepatientisunconscious,aspiratetoconfirmplacementthenflushwith10–20mL0.9%SodiumChloride.AAIfthepatientisconscious,administer:ADULT:2%Lidocaine1mg/kgIOslowpush.Maximumdose40mg.PEDIATRIC:2%Lidocaine0.5mg/kgIOslowpush.Maximumdose20mg.AllowLidocainetodwellforoneminute,thenflushwith0.9%sodiumchloride.Mayrepeatonce,asnecessaryforpaincontrol.AAOnceIOaccessisobtainedandverified,refertoMedicationAdministrationprocedure.APEARLS•Iftwo“pops”orlossesofresistancearefelt,itislikelytheneedlehaspassedthroughthebonecompletely.Removetheneedle.•Toremoveanon-functionalIO,attacha10ccsyringetotheLuer-lockthenrotateclockwisewhilepullingstraightback.Disposeoftheneedleinasharpscontainer.• IOflowrates:Proximalhumerus(~80mL/min),Tibia(~15mL/min)•AnymedicationroutinelyadministeredviatheIVroutemaybeadministeredviatheIOrouteifIVaccessisnotavailable.

--- PAGE 250 ---
Intraosseous(IO)Access
RegionalPatientCareProtocols,Policies&ProceduresMarch2024Procedures: Intraosseous Access Page 2 of 2 


--- PAGE 251 ---
MedicalDevicesandPumps
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2022v0722 Procedures: Medical Devices and Pumps Page 1 of 6 INDICATIONSAnypatientwithanimplanted,wearable,orattachedmedicationorcardiacsupportdeviceorpump.PROCEDUREVentricularAssistDevice(VAD)EMRAssessVAD.Look/Listenforalarms.ListenforVADhum.Ifbatteriesaredepleted,connecttoalternatepowersource,orreplaceonebatteryatatimewiththeassistanceofthepatient,atrainedfamilymember,orthedevicecoordinator.Donotremovebothbatteriesatthesametime.EMREMRAssessperfusion(skincolor,skintemperature,capillaryrefill).EMRIAssesscardiacrhythm.Followprotocolsforarrhythmias.Cardiovert/defibrillateifindicated.IVAD:ConsciousPatientMCIfhypotensive,perfusionisinadequate,oralarmreads“LowFlow,”contactthedevicecoordinatorand/orMedicalControlforguidancepriortoadministeringIVForvasopressors.MCVAD:UnconsciousPatient,VADNotFunctioningEMTAttempttorestartVAD.Ensuredrivelineandpowersourceareconnected.Ensurebatterieshavecharge.Ifstillnotrestarted,replacesystemcontroller(Seepearls).EMTEMTIfunabletorestartthedevice:Beginchestcompressions.Reassesscardiacrhythm/applyAED,andfollowappropriateCardiacArrestprotocols.Defibrillateifindicated.AdministerACLSmedicationsasindicated.EMTVAD:UnconsciousPatient,VADFunctioningEMTIfperfusionisadequate,assessforalternatecausesofalteredmentalstatus(e.g.hypoxia,hypoglycemia,overdose,stroke)andfollowstandardprotocols.EMTIIfperfusionisinadequate,assessMAPand/orintubateandassessETCO2**.Ifunabletointubate,SGAmaybeused. ETCO2above20mmHgorMAPabove50mmHg:Assessforalternatecausesofpoorperfusion(e.g.sepsis,hypovolemia,allergicreaction). ETCO2below20mmHgorMAPbelow50mmHg:Beginchestcompressions.ReassesscardiacrhythmandfollowappropriateCardiacArrestprotocols.Defibrillateifindicated.AdministerACLSmedicationsasindicated.IMCForallotherdeviceissuescontactthedevicecoordinatorand/orMedicalControlforguidance.MC

--- PAGE 252 ---
MedicalDevicesandPumps
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2022v0722 Procedures: Medical Devices and Pumps Page 2 of 6 TotalArtificialHeart(TAH)MCIfhypotensiveorshowingsignsofinadequateperfusion,refertoHypotensionandShockprotocol.Contactdevicecoordinatorand/orMedicalControlimmediatelyforguidance.Donotadministervasopressors.DonotobtainECG.Donotattemptpacing.MCMCIfunresponsiveandwithoutpalpablepulses,assistventilations.Ensurethedrivelineandpowersourceareconnected.Ensurebatterieshavechargeandreplaceifnecessary.Contactthedevicecoordinatorand/orMedicalControlforguidance.Donotbeginchestcompressions.DonotobtainECG.Donotcardiovert/defibrillate.MCMCForallotherdeviceissuescontactthedevicecoordinatorand/orMedicalControlforguidance.MCAutomatedImplantableCardioverterDefibrillator(AICD)/PacemakerIIfthepatientreportsashockwasdelivered,assesscardiacrhythm.Followstandardprotocols.IWearableDefibrillator(LifeVest)IDonotremovethevestunlessimpedingnecessaryassessmentorcare.Ifremoved,monitorcardiacrhythm.Ifashockisdelivered,assesspatientandcardiacrhythm.IInsulinPumpEMTIfbloodglucoseis<60mg/dL,ensurethepumpisturnedcompletelyofforremoved.EMTContinuousInfusionMedicationPumpMCDonotdisconnectordiscontinuethepump.Notethemedicationanddosebeinginfused,thencontactMedicalControlforguidance.MCPeripherallyInsertedCentralCatheter(PICC)AAccessonlyifemergentlyneededandalternateIVaccesscannotbeobtained(2attempts).ACentralVenousCatheter/TunneledCatheter/MedicationPortADonotaccess.FollowIntraosseousAccessprocedureifperipheralaccesscannotbeobtained.A

--- PAGE 253 ---
MedicalDevicesandPumps
RegionalPatientCareProtocols,Policies&ProceduresMarch2024Procedures:MedicalDevicesandPumpsPage3of6PEARLS *Thepatientorfamilywilloftenhaveextensiveexperiencetroubleshootingthedeviceaswellascontactinformationforadevicecoordinator,particularlyforcardiacsupportdevicessuchasVADsandTAHs.Thesecoordinatorscanbeextremelyhelpfulintroubleshootingdeviceissuesandalarms,coordinatingresources,andappropriatelytriagingthepatienttodefinitivecare.However,whiledevicecoordinatorscanmakesuggestions,theycannotprovidebindingonlinemedicalcontrolordersbasedonVirginiaDepartmentofHealthregulations.Iftheirrecommendationscontradictestablishedprotocolorscopeorpractice,contactMedicalControlforguidance. Therearemultiplepotentialcausesforhypotensionor“LowFlow”alarmswithaVAD.Whilehypovolemiaisafrequentissue,largevolumesofIVfluidsmaycatastrophicallyworsenothercauses(e.g.pumpthrombosis).Giventhecomplexityofthesepatients,seekingexpertconsultationpriortoinitiatingtherapyishighlyrecommended. **ETCO2(EMT)forthepurposeofdeterminingadequacyofperfusionshouldbemeasuredviaendotrachealtubeortracheostomy.ETCO2(EMT)measuredviaSGA(EMT)isareasonablealternativeintheprehospitalenvironmentifendotrachealintubationcannotberapidlyperformed. AssessmentofpatientswithVADscanbechallengingduetodifferencesinexamandavailablevitalsignssuchasabsentpulses,difficultyassessingBP,andthepresenceofmachinenoiseoverthelungfields.Alternateindicatorsofperfusionstatecanbeextremelyhelpfulsuchasreportedsymptoms,mentalstatus,andwarmthofextremities.Handhelddopplerorultrasoundmayallowforassessmentofsystolicbloodpressure,whichisequivalenttoMAPinthecaseofacontinuousflowVAD.AssumeallVADandTAHpatientstobeanticoagulated. VADpatientscansometimesmaintainconsciousnesswhileexhibitingotherwiselethalarrhythmiassuchasventriculartachycardiaandventricularfibrillation.Treatmentoftheseconditionsfollowsstandardprotocols. ToreplacetheVADsystemcontroller,ensurepowerissuppliedtothebackupunit,thenquicklytransferthedrivelinetothenewunit.Ifsuccessful,theunitwillpoweronautomatically.AttemptthisONLYasalastresort(ideallyundertelephoneguidancefromadevicecoordinatororwithhelpofatrainedfamilymember). Generally,forpatientswithVADsandTAHs,vasopressorsarereservedforhypotension/shockrefractorytovolumeexpansion.Whenindicated,lowdosenorepinephrineisthepreferredagent.UseonlyindirectconsultationwithadevicecoordinatororMedicalControl. TotalArtificialHearts(TAHs)donotgenerateanelectrocardiographicrhythm.DonotattempttoobtainacardiacrhythmorECG.Theresultwillappeartobeasystoleregardlessofdevicefunction. Upto5defibrillationscanbeprovidedbythewearabledefibrillator(LifeVest).Anaudiblealarmwillsoundifanarrhythmiaisdetected.Ifthepatientisconscious,he/shecaninactivatethetreatmentsequence.Ifnotinactivated,atranscutaneousdefibrillationwillbedelivered,typicallywithinoneminute.Standclearifthealarmissounding.Oncethealarmisnolongersounding,assessthepatientandcontinuetreatmentasindicated.Infectionisamajorconcernforcentrallyterminatingvenouscathetersandports.Sterilitymustbemaintained. Asnewerandmorecomplexdevicesbecomeavailabletopatientsinthecommunity,theneedincreasesforclearandtimelycommunicationbetweenfirstresponders,receivingfacilities,andspecialtycenters.Whenindoubt,contactMedicalControlforguidance.

--- PAGE 254 ---
MedicalDevicesandPumps
RegionalPatientCareProtocols,Policies&ProceduresMarch2024Procedures:MedicalDevicesandPumpsPage4of6VentricularAssistDevices
TotalArtificialHeart(TAH)


--- PAGE 255 ---
MedicalDevicesandPumps
RegionalPatientCareProtocols,Policies&ProceduresMarch2024Procedures:MedicalDevicesandPumpsPage5of6AHAVentricularAssistDevice(VAD)ResuscitationAlgorithm(Forreferenceonly)


--- PAGE 256 ---
MedicalDevicesandPumps
RegionalPatientCareProtocols,Policies&ProceduresMarch2024Procedures:MedicalDevicesandPumpsPage6of6AHATotalArtificialHeart(TAH)ResuscitationAlgorithm(Forreferenceonly)


--- PAGE 257 ---
Medication Administration 
RegionalPatientCareProtocols,Policies&ProceduresVersion:March01,2022Procedures:MedicationAdministrationPage1of2INDICATIONS• Anypatientrequiringpharmacotherapytotreatorfacilitatethetreatmentofanacuteillnessorinjury.•IntraosseousadministrationisindicatedforpatientsinextremisrequiringimmediatemedicationadministrationwhenIVaccesscannotbereadilyobtained(90secondsortwofailedattempts).•Intranasalandintramuscularadministrationareindicatedwhenimmediatemedicationadministrationisrequired,andIV/IOaccesscannotbereadilyobtained(e.g.paincontrol)orforcertainconditionsinwhichIN/IMisthepreferredrouteforspecifictherapy(e.g.IMEpinephrineforanaphylaxis).PROCEDUREEMTPreparethemedicationtobeadministered.Refertoprotocolspecificindicationsandscopeofpracticeforindividualmedications.RefertoPharmacologysectionfordrugspecificinformation.EMTEMTCROSSCHECKwithanotherqualifiedproviderthatthecorrectmedicationisbeingadministeredtothecorrectpatientviaanappropriaterouteatanappropriatedoseandthatthemedicationisnotexpired.EMTINTRAVENOUS(IV)AObtainIVaccess.VerifypatencyoftheIVaccesssitepriortoadministeringanymedication.AAAdministerthemedicationattheappropriaterate:• IVpush:Rapidadministration.• IVslowpush:Atleast30seconds.Preferably1-2minutes.• OverXminutes:Slowlyinjectoverthespecifiedtimeframe.• Continuousinfusion:Establishadripatanappropriatedose/rate.• ViaIVpumponly:EstablishacontinuousinfusionutilizinganIVpump.AAPeriodicallyreassesstheadministrationsiteforsignsoflocalreactionand/orinfiltrationoftheIV.ImmediatelystopanyinfusioniftheIVisnolongerpatentorbecomesinfiltrated.AINTRAOSSEOUS(IO)AObtainIOaccess.RefertoIntraosseousAccessprocedure.AAFollowstepsaboveforIVmedicationadministration.AINTRANASAL(IN)EMTAttachasyringecontainingthefulldoseofthemedicationtobeadministeredtothemucosalatomizingdevice(MAD).EMTEMTInserttheMADintoonenostril,orientingthetipposteriorly.Administerhalfofthedose.Administertheotherhalfofthedoseinthesecondnostril.Donotexceed1mLpernostril.EMT

--- PAGE 258 ---
Medication Administration 
RegionalPatientCareProtocols,Policies&ProceduresVersion:March01,2022Procedures:MedicationAdministrationPage2of2INTRAMUSCULAR(IM)EMTLocateandexposeanappropriateadministrationsite(Deltoidoranterolateralthigh).Cleansethesitewithanalcoholpadordisinfectantswab.Avoidanyareaofinjuryorinfection.EMTEMTAttachanappropriatelysizedneedletoasyringecontainingthedoseofmedicationtobeadministered.Holdvertically(needletipup)anddepresstheplungertoexpelanyairinthesyringe.EMTEMTInserttheneedleperpendiculartotheskintothedepthofthetargetedmuscle.Depresstheplungerslowly,ensuringthefullintendeddoseisadministered,thenwithdrawanddisposeoftheneedle.EMTPEARLS• IOflowrates:Proximalhumerus(~80mL/min),Tibia(~15mL/min)•AnymedicationroutinelyadministeredviatheIVroutemaybeadministeredviatheIOrouteifIVaccessisnotavailable.• Utilizingbothnaresmaximizesthedistributionofmedicationacrossthemucosalsurface,increasingabsorption.• Donotadministerintranasalmedicationsifthereisevidenceofnasal/facialtraumaorbleedingfromthenose.•TheanterolateralthighisthepreferredsiteforIMinjectionduetolargermusclemass,higherbloodflowandmorerapidabsorption.•Donotadministermorethan3mLintotheDeltoidsiteor5mLintotheanterolateralthighsiteforadults.Iflargervolumesarenecessaryduetoavailablemedicationconcentrations,usemultiplesitessimultaneously.


--- PAGE 259 ---
Nasogastric Tube Insertion 
March2024Page1of1
INDICATIONS• Gastricdecompressioninintubatedpatients(improvesventilationcompliance,reducesriskofaspiration)• Airwaymanagementinpatientswithmassivehematemesis• Persistentlargevolumeemesisrefractorytoanti-emeticsPROCEDUREIEstimateinsertionlengthbysuperimposingthetubeoverthebodyandmeasuringfromnosetoeartoxiphoidprocess.Notethelength.IILubricatethedistalendofthetubewithLidocainegelandpassitthroughthepatient’snostrilposteriorlyalongthefloorofthenasalpassage.Donotorientthetipupward.IIContinuetoadvancethetubegentlyuntilthemeasuredlengthisreached.Ensurethetubeisnotcoiledintheoropharynx.IIConfirmplacement:Inject20ccofairusingaToomeysyringewhileauscultatingovertheepigastriumforbubbles.IISecurethetubetothenosewithtapeandattachtheproximalendofthetubetolow/mediumsuction.IIDocumenttheindication,depthofinsertion,andvolumeofanyoutput.IPEARLS•Caution:NGtubeinsertioniscontraindicatedforpatientswithknownesophagealvariceswithoutactivehemorrhage,recentmaxillofacialsurgery,andacutemaxillofacialtrauma.• Inthesettingofanunconscious,intubatedpatient,oralinsertionofthetubemaybeconsidered.•ForpatientswithmassiveupperGIbleedingandpersistenthematemesis,placementofanasogastrictubepriortoattemptingorotrachealintubationmayallowforimprovedvisualizationofairwaystructures.• Ifthepatientisconscious,swallowingasipofwatermayfacilitateplacement.
RegionalPatientCareProtocols,Policies&ProceduresProcedures:NasogastricTubeInsertion

--- PAGE 260 ---
ThisPageIntentionallyLeftBlank

--- PAGE 261 ---
Neonatal Resuscitation 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: March 1, 2023 Procedures–  Neonatal  Resuscitation (Pediatric) Page 1 of 2 CRITERIA Anynewbornwhoisunresponsiveorhaspoortoneorrespiratoryeffort Anynewbornorneonate(<28days)withaheartratelessthan100/min,apnea,ornopalpablepulsePROTOCOLEMRFollowGeneral-UniversalPatientCare/InitialPatientContactprotocol.EMREMRPostdelivery Warmandmaintainnormaltemperature. Position/openairway(inasniffingposition–eartosternalnotch) Dryandstimulatethenewbornvigorously. Clearsecretionsonlyifneeded.Note:Routinesuctioningisnolongerrecommended.ONLYperformtrachealsuctioningifthickmeconiumpresentoriftheairwayisobstructed.EMRIfLaboredBreathingorPersistentCyanosis,inadditiontoabove:EMRGivesupplementaloxygen,asrequired.EMREMTApplySpO2monitor.EMTAAssessbloodglucose.If<40mg/dLduringthefirst72hoursoflifeor<60mg/dLthereafter,administer:Dextrose10%(D10W)5mL/kgIV/IORepeatdosein5minutes,asneeded.AIfApneic/Gaspingand/orHRislessbelow100/min,inadditiontoabove:EMRBeginpositivepressureventilationwithBVMand21%oxygenfor30seconds,thenincreaseto100%oxygen.Ensureadequatechestrise.40-60breathsperminute.EMREMTPlacesupraglotticairwayifnecessary.ApplyETCO2monitoring.EMTIApplyECGmonitoring.IPIntubateifunabletoventilateadequatelybylessinvasivemeansPIfHRbelow60/minorpulseless,inadditiontoabove:EMRBeginchestcompressions.Coordinatewithventilation.3compressionsforeachbreath.30breathsperminutewithchestcompressions.EMRAObtainIV/IOaccessifnotalreadyobtained.AAAdminister:0.9%NormalSaline10mL/kgIV/IOover5minutesRepeatasnecessary,upto30mL/kg.AIAdminister:Epinephrine(Adrenaline)0.01mg/kg(0.1mg/mL)IV/IORepeatdoseevery3-5minutesuntilheartrateis>60/minandpalpable.IIAssessfortensionpneumothorax.RefertoChestDecompressionprocedure.IMCContactmedicalcontrolforguidanceanddestinationdetermination.MC

--- PAGE 262 ---
Neonatal Resuscitation 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: March 1, 2023 Procedures–  Neonatal  Resuscitation (Pediatric) Page 2 of 2 PEARLSForEpinephrine0.1mg/mLpreloadedsyringe,combine1mgofEpinephrine1mg/mLwith9mL0.9%SodiumChlorideina10mLsyringe.ExpectedSpO2afterbirth:1min–60-65%2min–65-70%3min–70-75%4min–75-80%5min–80-85%10min–85-95%Palpatingapulseonaneonatecanbeextremelydifficult.Often,itiseasiesttopalpateattheumbilicalstump.Otherwise,useastethoscopeoverthechesttocountheartbeatsifnecessary.Useasyringeand3-waystopcocktoadministerprecisefluidamountstoneonates(pull-pushmethod).Donotinfusefluidstoneonatesviapressure-bag.Neonatesofmotherswithpoorlycontrolleddiabetesorwithahistoryofpoorfeeding/lowbirthweightareatparticularriskofearlyhypoglycemia.

--- PAGE 263 ---
PEDIATRICCardiopulmonaryResuscitation(CPR)
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: March 01, 2022 Procedures: Adult Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Page 1 of 3 CRITERIA Pediatricpatientwhoisunresponsive,withoutpalpablepulseorrespiration(excludingagonalbreaths). PediatricpatientwithUnstableBradycardia:sustainedventricularratelessthan60BPMANDsignsofinadequateperfusion(refertoPediatricBradycardiaprotocol). Patientswithobviousdeath(rigormortis,lividity,decomposition,orinjuriesinconsistentwithsurvival)areexcluded.PROTOCOLEMRFollowGeneral–UniversalPatientCare/InitialPatientContactprotocol.EMREMRDetermineDNRstatus.RefertoDeath&CriteriaforWithholdingResuscitationprotocol.EMREMRBeginchestcompressions.Pushhardandfast.Allowfullchestrecoil.Limitpausesto<10sec.Depth:1/3APdiameterofthechestor1.5-2”Rate:100–120bpm.Infant/Neonate:Use2fingersorthumbsChild:Use1handEMREMRAdminister100%oxygen.Donotover-ventilate.Maintaincompression-ventilationratio15:2untiladvancedairwayisestablished,thenadministeronebreathevery2-3seconds.EMREMRApplyAED/Assesscardiacrhythmevery2minutes.IfAEDisadvisingtoshockorrhythmisVForVT(asdeterminedbyEMT-IorP),defibrillateat2J/kgthenrefertoCardiacArrest:VentricularFibrillation/PulselessVentricularTachycardiaprotocol.IfAEDisadvisingnoshockorrhythmisasystoleorPEA(asdeterminedbyEMT-IorP),continueCPRthenrefertoCardiacArrest:Asystole/PulselessElectricalActivityprotocol.EMREMRAlternatecompressorsevery2minutesorsooneriffatigued.EMREMTIfETCO2<10ordropping,reassessandoptimizecompressionrate,depth,andrecoil.EMTEMRIfROSCisachieved,refertoPostCardiacArrestCare(ROSC)protocol.EMRMCIfROSCisnotachieved,refertoDeathandCriteriaforWithholdingResuscitationprotocol.Note:Onceinitiated,terminationofresuscitativeeffortsisaMedicalControldecisiononly.MC

--- PAGE 264 ---
PEDIATRICCardiopulmonaryResuscitation(CPR)
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: March 01, 2022 Procedures: Adult Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Page 2 of 3 PEARLSCompressions:Push hard and fast: rate 100 – 120 bpm. Allow complete chest recoil. Minimizeinterruptionsinchestcompressions. Changecompressorevery2minutesorsooneriffatigued. Givecontinuouscompressionswithadvancedairway. UsequantitativeETCO2monitoringwithBVMo IfETCO2<10mmHg,improvechestcompressionso IfsuddenincreaseinETCO2isnoted(above30-40mmHg),checkpulseandrhythmforROSC.Airway: Avoidexcessiveventilation. Consider supraglottic airway (BIAD) (EMT).Endotrachealintubationhasnotbeenshowntoimproveoutcomesforchildrenwithout-of-hospitalcardiacarrest. StudiestodatehavenotshownaclearimprovementinoutcomeswithSGAvsintubation–donotcompromisechestcompressionsforintubation. UseETCO2toconfirmandmonitorplacementofanyadvancedairway. ContinuallymonitorETCO2withtargetabove10mmHgduringCPRand35–45mmHgonceROSCisachieved. InpostROSCpatient,ifETCO2fallsbelow20mmHgorsignalislost,immediatelyreassesspulsesandairway.Defibrillation: Ensurepadplacementisoptimal.Adjustpadsifshockablerhythmisrefractorytoelectricaltherapy.ConsiderAnterior/Posteriorplacement. Initialdefibrillationat2joules/kg.Subsequentdefibrillationsat4joules/kg.Reversiblecauses:Identifyandtreatperappropriateprotocolandscopeofpractice: Hypoxia•Tensionpneumothorax HyperkalemiaorHypokalemia•Tamponade(Cardiac) Hypothermia•Thrombosis(Cardiac,Pulmonary) Hypovolemia•Toxins Hydrogenion(acidosis) Hypoglycemiaorhyperglycemia Trauma Tablets(DrugOverdose)TerminationofResuscitation(TOR): RefertoDeath&CriteriaforWithholdingResuscitationprotocol. TerminationofresuscitativeeffortsisaMedicalControldecisiononly. ConsidercontactingMedicalControltorequestTORifthearrestwasnotwitnessedbyEMSandafter20minutesofcontinuousCPR:1) Therehasbeennoreturnofspontaneouscirculation(ROSC).AND2) Noshocksweredelivered.

--- PAGE 265 ---
PEDIATRICCardiopulmonaryResuscitation(CPR)
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies &Procedures Version: March 01, 2022 Procedures: Adult Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Page 3 of 3 AHAPEDIATRICCPRALGORITHM(Forreferenceonly)


--- PAGE 266 ---
ThisPageIntentionallyLeftBlank

--- PAGE 267 ---
SpinalMotionRestriction
RegionalPatientCareProtocols,Policies&ProceduresVersion:March01,2022Procedures:SpinalMotionRestrictionPage1of2INDICATIONS• InitiateSpinalMotionalRestriction(SMR)foranypatientwithnon-penetratingtrauma(includingfalls)ANDatleastoneofthefollowing:o ADULT: Acutelyalteredlevelofconsciousness(GCS<15orevidenceofintoxication) Midlineneckorbackpainand/ortenderness Focalneurologicsignsand/orsymptoms(e.g.numbnessormotorweakness) Anatomicdeformityofthespine Distractingcircumstancesorinjuryo PEDIATRIC: Complaintofneckpainorapparentdiscomfort/tenderness Torticollis Acuteneurologicdeficit Alteredmentalstatus(GCS<15,evidenceofintoxication,agitation,decreasedrespirations,somnolence,etc) High-riskmotorvehicleaccidents,high-impactdivinginjuries,orsignificanttorsoinjuries.• ThereisnoroleforSMRinisolatedpenetratingtrauma.PROCEDUREEMRMaintainapatentairwaywhilemanuallystabilizingthecervicalspineuntilanappropriatelysizedcervicalcollaroralternativeisapplied.Maintainalignmentofthehead,neck,andtorsoatalltimes.EMREMRPerformafocusedneurologicassessmentincludingGCS,motor,andsensoryfunction.EMREMRAssessdistalperfusion.EMREMRIfnecessarytolift/carry/maneuverthepatient,utilizealongbackboard,scoopstretcher,orextricationdevicewithstrapswhenfeasible.Minimizeflexion,extension,androtationofthespine.EMREMROnceonthestretcher,thebackboard,scoopstretcher,orextricationdevicemayberemoved.Considerleavingthepatientonalongbackboardtoreducethenumberofnecessarymovementsifsuspicionforinjuryishighortransporttimeisshort.EMREMRSMRcannotbeproperlyachievedwiththepatientinasittingposition.Ifelevationoftheheadisrequired,thedeviceusedtostabilizethespineshouldbeelevatedattheheadwhilemaintainingalignmentoftheneckandtorso.EMRMCContactMedicalControlforguidanceiftheneedforSMRisunclear.MC

--- PAGE 268 ---
SpinalMotionRestriction
RegionalPatientCareProtocols,Policies&ProceduresVersion:March01,2022Procedures:SpinalMotionRestrictionPage2of2PEARLS• Applypaddingand/orashoulderrollforpediatricpatientstominimizeneckflexion.• Patientsinthelate2ndand3rdtrimesterofpregnancyshouldbetransportedwithpaddingundertherightsidetodisplacetheuterusfromthevenacava(turnedslightlytotheleft).• PatientswhoareambulatoryatthescenemayormaynotrequireSMR.IfthepatientisambulatoryandmeetsthecriteriaaboveforSMR,theymaybeassistedintoasupinepositiononthestretcherwhileminimizingmovementofthespinetothemaximumextentpossible.• Forpatientsseatedinavehicleorotherconfinedspace,spinalmotionrestrictionmaybebestachievedthroughself-extricationwithproviderassistance,whenpossible.• Forfurtherinformationsee:SpinalMotionRestrictionintheTraumaPatient–AJointPositionStatementbyACS-COT,ACEP,andNAEMSP.

--- PAGE 269 ---
SurgicalAirway
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: March 01, 2022 Procedures: Surgical Airway Page 1 of 2 INDICATIONS• Inabilitytooxygenatebylessinvasivemeans.• Surgicalcricothyrotomy:Greaterthanapproximately12yearsoldorgreaterthan35-40kg• Needlecricothyrotomy:Lessthanapproximately12yearsoldorlessthan35-40kgPROCEDURESurgicalCricothyrotomyPPositionthepatientsupine,expose,andcleansetheanteriorneck.Usethenon-dominanthandtoidentifyandstabilizethethyroidcartilageandusetheindexfingertopalpatethecricothyroidmembrane.PPMakeaverticalincision(2–3cm)acrossthecricothyroidmembrane.PPMakeahorizontalincisionthroughthecricothyroidmembrane(1–2cm)andplacethenon-dominantindexfingerintotheairway.PPPassanendotrachealtubeintroducer/bougieintothetracheaandwithdrawtheindexfinger.PPPassanendotrachealtube(size4-0to6-0)overthebougieandwithdrawthebougie.PPVentilatethepatientandconfirm/monitorplacementwithcontinuousETCO2box-waveformandSpO2.Ensurepresenceofbilateralbreathsoundsandsecurethetube.Considercontinuousmanualstabilization.PMCContactMedicalControlandtransporttotheclosestEmergencyDepartmentifairwaycannotbesecured.MCNeedleCricothyrotomyPPositionthepatientsupine,exposeandcleansetheanteriorneck.Usethenon-dominanthandtoidentifyandstabilizethethyroidcartilageandusetheindexfingertopalpatethecricothyroidmembrane.PPAttachasyringefilledwith0.9%SodiumChlorideontoa14-guagecatheter-needle.Whileaspiratingthesyringe,inserttheneedleata45-degreeangleinferiorlythroughthecricothyroidmembrane.Whenthetracheaisentered,airwillbeaspiratedeasily.Donotadvancetheneedleanyfurther.PPAdvancethecatheterovertheneedle,thenwithdrawtheneedle.Donotbend/kinkthecatheter.PPAttachanadaptertothecatheterandconnecttoanoxygensource.*PPVentilatethepatientandconfirm/monitorplacementwithcontinuousETCO2box-waveformandSpO2.Ensurepresenceofbilateralbreathsounds.Maintaincontinuousmanualstabilizationofthecatheter.PMCContactMedicalControlandtransporttotheclosestEmergencyDepartment.MC

--- PAGE 270 ---
SurgicalAirway
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: March 01, 2022 Procedures: Surgical Airway Page 2 of 2 PEARLS• *Avarietyofoptionsexisttoconnecta14-gaugeneedletoanoxygensource.Thebestoptiondependsonthesizeandpositionofthepatientandlungcompliance.Giventheclinicalcircumstance,thebestoptionislikelytobeutilizingwhichevertoolsaremostreadilyandrapidlyavailable.Themostreadilyavailableadaptersareusually:o Attacha3-0endotrachealtubeadaptordirectlytothecatheter.VentilatewithBVM.o Attacha3mLsyringetothecatheter,removetheplunger,thenattacha7-0endotrachealtubeadaptortothesyringe.VentilatewithBVM.o Attacha10mLsyringetothecatheter,removetheplunger,theninserta7-0endotrachealtubeintothesyringeandinflatetheballoon.VentilatewithBVM.• Itisunlikelyapatientwillbeabletobeventilatedadequatelyvianeedlecricothyrotomy.Prioritizeoxygenationwhileavoidingbarotrauma.Donotover-ventilate.Amoredefinitiveairwayisrequired–donotdelaytransporttotheclosestemergencydepartment.• Ifasurgicalairwayisperformed,clearlydocumentconsiderationoforattemptstomanagetheairwaybylessinvasivemeans.• Ifapatientcannotbeoxygenatedbylessinvasivemeans,moveimmediatelytosurgicalairwaymanagement.• Bleedingduringorafterasurgicalairwayiscommon.Utilizein-linesuctiontocleartheairwayasnecessary.


--- PAGE 271 ---
TaserBarbRemoval
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies &Procedures Version: 2012v0322 Procedures: Taser Barb Removal Page 1 of 2 INDICATIONS• RemovalofTaserbarbsimbeddedintheskinofapatientrequiringnoothertreatmentandrefusingtransporttothehospital.PROCEDUREEMTCoordinatewithlawenforcementtoensuretheweaponandpatientarerenderedsafetoproceed.RefertoBehavioralEmergenciesprotocolandPatientRestraintpolicy,asneeded.EMTEMTEnsuretheTasercartridgeisremovedfromtheweaponorwiresarecutpriortoremovingthedarts.EMTEMTAssessforinjuriesassociatedwithburns,electrocution,and/orblunttrauma.Consider12-LeadECG.EMTEMTLocateandexposebothdarts.Ifthedartshavepenetratedtheeye,face,neck,breast,axilla,genitals,hands,orfeet,leavetheminplaceandtransporttoanEmergencyDepartmentforremoval.EMTEMTUseonehandtoholdtheskinaroundthebarbtaut.Withtheotherhand,useahemostatorforcepstograsptheelectrodeshaft.Pullstraightoutwithagentle,quickmotion.Ensurethebarbisintact.EMTEMTSafelydisposeofthedartinanappropriatecontainerforsharpbiohazards.EMTEMTProvidewoundcare,asnecessary.Applyabandageoverthewoundsites.EMTEMTIfthebarbcannotbesafely,easily,andcompletelyremoved,transporttoanEmergencyDepartmentforremoval.EMTPEARLS• ConsidershallowunderlyingstructurespriortoremovalofanyTaserbarb.Ifremovalmaycauseadditionaldamagetounderlyinganatomy(e.g.neuro-vascularstructures,tendons),donotattemptremoval.Whenindoubt,contactMedicalControlforguidance.• Ensurethepatienthascapacitytodeclinefurtherassessment/transportandclearlydocumentthecircumstancesofthatdecision.• Ensuretheentirebarbisremoved.Ifthebarbisbroken,theentirebarbcannotaccountedfor,orthereisanyconcernforaretainedforeignbody,transportforfurtherassessmentshouldberecommended.

--- PAGE 272 ---
TaserBarbRemoval
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies &Procedures Version: 2012v0322 Procedures: Taser Barb Removal Page 2 of 2 


--- PAGE 273 ---
TourniquetApplication
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies & Procedures Version: 2012v0322 Procedures: Tourniquet Application Page 1 of 1 INDICATIONS• Anypatientwithlife-threateninghemorrhagefromanextremitywhichcannotbecontrolledbyothermeans,suchaswoundpackinganddirectpressure,duetoextentofinjuryorclinical/operationalcircumstances.PROCEDUREEMRCompletelyexposetheinjuryandassessforadditionalinjuries.EMREMRPositionthetourniquetproximaltotheinjury.Donotplaceacrossajointoropenfracture.EMREMRTightenthetourniquetuntilbleedingstopsanddistalpulsesareabsent.EMREMRIfbleedingisnotcontrolled,applyasecondtourniquetproximalandadjacenttothefirst.EMREMRClearlyindicatethetimeanddateofapplication.Ensurethetourniquetremainsexposedandvisible.EMREMROnceapplied,donotremoveorloosenthetourniquet(s).Additionaltighteningmayberequired.EMREMRConsiderpaincontrol.RefertoPainControlprotocol.EMRMCIfhemorrhagecannotbecontrolled,transportimmediatelytothenearestemergencydepartmentandcontactMedicalControlforguidance.MCPEARLS• Ensurelocationandtimeofapplicationofanytourniquetisprovidedtothereceivingphysicianduringpatientturnover.• Forcrush/harness/suspensioninjuries,considerlooselypositioningtourniquetspriortorelease/extrication.Tightenifhemorrhageorhemodynamiccollapse(crushsyndrome)occur.If,duetoongoingextrication,accesstothepatientwillcontinuetobelimitedfollowingreleaseofthecrushedextremitiesrenderingpatientcareimpossible(e.g.highanglerescuefromasuspendedharness),considerapplyingtourniquetspriortorelease.• Useofanapprovedcommercialdeviceispreferred.Ifoneisnotavailable,anappropriatelysizedbloodpressurecuffinflatedtoapressuresufficienttostopbleedingisanacceptablealternative.Improvisedtourniquetsareunreliableandgenerallynotrecommended.

--- PAGE 274 ---
ThisPageIntentionallyLeftBlank

--- PAGE 275 ---
Transcutaneous Pacing 
Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies &Procedures Version: March 01, 2022 Procedures: Transcutaneous Pacing Page 1 of 1 INDICATIONS• Anyadultpatientwithpersistentsymptomaticbradycardia(HR<60bpm)•Considertransthoracicpacingforpediatricpatientsover28daysold,withpersistentsymptomaticbradycardiadespiteadequateventilation,high-qualitychestcompressions,andtwoweight-baseddoseseachofEpinephrineandAtropine.PROCEDUREIRemoveanyclothingcoveringthechest.Dryand/orshavethearea,ifnecessary.Apply4-LeadECGandconfirmrhythm.IIApplymulti-functionpadsinanterior/posteriorpositionandsetcardiacmonitortopacingmode.IISetpacingrateat80beatsperminute.Setinitialcurrentoutputto50mA.Confirmpacer“spikes”appearoncardiacmonitor.IISlowlyincreasethepaceroutput(10mA/10seconds)untilelectricalcaptureisachieved.Confirmmechanicalcapturebypalpatingfemoralpulses.Reassessthepatient.IMCIfmechanicalcaptureisnotachieveddespitemaximumelectricaloutput,discontinuepacing.RefertoSymptomaticBradycardiaprotocolandcontactMedicalControlforguidance.MCPEARLS• Ventricularfibrillationandventriculartachycardiaarerarecomplications.• Pacingmaystimulatethediaphragm,causinginvoluntaryspasm(hiccups).•Considersedationorpaincontrolpriortoinitiatingpacing.Duetotheriskofover-sedation,donotadministerbothopiatesandbenzodiazepines.•Pacingisrarelyneededorindicatedforpatientsunder12yearsold.Stronglyconsiderconsultingwithmedicalcontrolatapediatricemergencydepartment(e.g.VCUChildren’sHospitalorCHKD)forguidance.o VCUCOR:804-828-3989,asktospeakwithaMedicalControlphysicianinthepediatricEmergencyDepartment.oCHKD:757-668-8000•Symptomaticbradycardiaincludesanypatientover28daysoldwithasustainedventricularratelessthan60BPMandoneormoreofthefollowingsignsorsymptomsofinadequateperfusiondespiteadequateoxygenationandventilation:o Hypotensiono Chestpaino AMS/Decreasedresponsivenesso ETCO2<25o Dyspnea/PulmonaryEdemao Diaphoresis

--- PAGE 276 ---
ThisPageIntentionallyLeftBlank

--- PAGE 277 ---
Vaccination Administration by EMS Providers 
Regional Patient Care Guidelines Version: April 1, 2021 Vaccination Administration by EMS Providers 1 of 3 PURPOSE:ToprovideguidancetoVirginiaEmergencyMedicalServices(EMS)OperationalMedicalDirectors(OMD),EMSagencies,andEMSproviderswithinthePeninsulasEMSRegionalCounciltoadministervaccinationsforpublichealthandsafetybyappropriatelycertified,authorized,andsupervisedEMSproviders.RESPONSIBILITIES:OMD Ensurethevaccinationprogramincludes:o managementandhandlingofvaccine.o registrationwithVIIS.o development/approvalofprotocolsfortrainingandauthorizationofvaccinatorso provisionofspecificvaccineinformation/educationandinformedconsenttovaccinerecipients.o specificproceduresforadministrationofvaccineandmanagementofanyvaccinationrelatedcomplications.o developmentandapprovalofappropriaterecordkeeping.o reportingofvaccinationinformationandanyadverseeventsorcomplications.o implementationofanongoingqualitymanagementprogramforthevaccinationprogram FunctionasthesupervisingphysicianfortheEMSvaccinationprogramand“prescriber”asidentifiedintheCodeofVirginia§§54.1-3303and54.1-3408,ifnotparticipatinginalocalhealthdistrict,pharmacy,orotherhealthsystemvaccinationprogrambyMOU.Agency HoldcurrentlicensureasanALSagencyinVirginia. EstablishandmaintainaMOUwiththelocalhealthdistrict,pharmacy,orotherhealthsystemORbeparticipatinginaregisteredEMSprogram. Maintainproofofcompetencyforeachvaccinator. EnsurerecordkeepingforallvaccinationsconformtoVIISguidelines. ReportanyadversereactionsthroughtheVaccineAdverseEventReportingSystem(VAERS).EMSProvider Holdavalid,unrestrictedAdvancedLifeSupportcertificateissuedbytheVirginiaCommissionerofHealth. MustbeaffiliatedwiththeVirginiaEMSagencydeveloping/implementingthevaccinationprogram. MustbeindividuallyapprovedbytheiragencyOMDasavaccinator. MustfollowprotocolsapprovedbytheirOMDforvaccineadministration.


--- PAGE 278 ---
Vaccination Administration by EMS Providers 
Regional Patient Care Guidelines Version: April 1, 2021 Vaccination Administration by EMS Providers 2 of 3 INDICATIONS• Patientmeetscurrentvaccinecriteria.PRECAUTIONS• Refertoprecautionspervaccinemanufacturer’sguidelines.CONTRAINDICATIONS• Refertocontraindicationspervaccinemanufacturer’sguidelines.PROCEDURE• DonPPEperCDCGuidelines,specificvaccinerecommendations,andagencyguidelines.• Ensurepatientmeetscurrentvaccinecriteria.• Obtainpatient/patientguardianinformedconsent.• Screenpatientforvaccinespecificprecautionsandcontraindications.• Ifpatientmeetsanyoftheprecautions,confirmpatienthasconsultedwiththeirhealthcareproviderpriortoreceivingvaccine.• Explainproceduretothepatient.• Providevaccinestatement.• Preparetoadministervaccine.• Administervaccinepermanufacturerguidelines.• Conductobservationforadverseeffectssuchasallergicreactionsandanaphylaxis(atleast15minutesorasrecommendedbymanufacturer).• Ifadverseeffect(s)occur,refertoappropriatePEMSPatientCareProtocol(s).Documentandreportadverseeffect(s)totheVaccineAdverseEffectsReportingSystem(VAERS).• DocumentvaccineadministrationpertheVirginiaImmunizationInformationSystem(VIIS).PEARLSVaccinesprovidedunderanEmergencyUseAuthorizationrequiresthateachrecipientreceiveavaccine-specificEUAFactSheetwiththefollowinginformation:• Basicinformationonthediseasesymptoms,andwhattodiscusswithahealthcareproviderbeforevaccination• Whoshouldandshouldnotreceivethevaccine• Thatrecipientshavethechoicetoreceiveorrefusethevaccine• Dosageandvaccineseriesinformation• Risksandbenefitsofthevaccine,includingcommonsideeffects• InformationonreportingsideeffectstoVAERS• AnexplanationofwhatanEUAisandwhyitisissued• Anyapprovedavailablealternativesforpreventingthedisease• Additionalresources


--- PAGE 279 ---
Vaccination Administration by EMS Providers 
Regional Patient Care Guidelines Version: April 1, 2021 Vaccination Administration by EMS Providers 3 of 3 PROCEDURE:
Obtain patient consent Screen for contraindications and precautions 
identified? 
 
 Yes DO NOT Administer vaccine Provide vaccine statement Administer vaccine per manufacturer guidelines Conduct Observation Period as recommended by manufacturer Follow documentation procedures 
 No 
 
 Refer to appropriate PEMS Patient Care Protocols  Document and report to VAERS 
Patient meets criteria? 
 
 No DO NOT Administer vaccine 
Don PPE per CDC Guidelines, specific vaccine recommendations, and agency guidelines 

--- PAGE 280 ---
ThisPageIntentionallyLeftBlank