PEMS Regional Patient Care Protocols, Policies and Procedures  
Introduction  
Version: March 2024  Introduction  
This collaborative effort provides a dynamic document that is based on national and state standards of 
care that include but are not limited to:  
•Virginia Department of  Health
•American Heart Association - Advanced Cardiac Life Support and Pediatric Advanced Life  Support
•American Academy of Pediatrics - Pediatric Education for Prehospital Professionals American College of
Surgeons Committee on Trauma - Advanced Trauma Life  Support
•National Association of Emergency Medical  Technicians
These protocols are reviewed continuously and updates provided to the MAC for deliberation and 
approval as national, state, and regional standards change and are supported by scientific research and 
literature.  
The primary purpose of these protocols is to establish a foundation and a minimum standard of care for the 
pre- hospital care delivered in our region. This is best served by active EMS operational medical directors 
and dedicated EMS providers supported by continued education, review, quality improvement and 
continuous pursuit of excellence.  
Although no document can specifically address every possible variation of injury or disease, this manual provides a foundation for the care of the patients we serve. The education, experience, and judgment of the 
pre-hospital provider should be recognized as the paramount part of sound clinical decision -making 
processes regarding pre-  hospital care. The complexity of emergency medicine and the pre -hospital setting 
requires a team approach using every appropriate, accepted and available resource to provide o ptimal 
patient care. In many cases, that resource is on -line medical control for consultation, advice, guidance, and 
authorization or modification of treatment not specifically addressed in this manual. The specific handling of 
these situations is determin ed by the operational medical director responsible for that particular EMS 
agency and the EMS providers they oversee, and for that reason is intentionally not addressed in this 
manual.  
The departmental policies are the responsibility of each agency and operational medical director. All 
are encouraged to support the premise of regional care and the collective effort on which these 
guidelines were founded.  
The provision of emergency care does not, and should not, occur in isolation. It requires many individuals 
and organizations working together towards a common goal - optimizing our patients’ clinical outcomes. 
The efforts provided by the PPP Committee whil e working in conjunction with the MAC will provide a basis 
for the development of a regional EMS approach to the "Standard of Excellence".  

--- PAGE 7 ---